THE EIGHTEENTH BRUMAIRE OF LOUIS NAPOLEON

On December 2 1851, followers of President Louis Bonaparte (Napoleon's
nephew) broke up the Legislative Assembly and established a
dictatorship. A year later, Louis Bonaparte proclaimed himself Emperor
Napoleon III.

Marx wrote The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon between December
1851 and February 1852. The "eighteenth Brumaire" refers to November
9, 1799 in the French Revolutionary Calendar -- the day Napoleon
Bonaparte made himself dictator by a coup d'etat.

Originally published in Die Revolution (a New York German-language
monthly established by Joseph Weydemeyer). Later editions (such as a
1869 Hamburg edition) were titled The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis
Bonaparte.

Marx concludes, in this work, that if a revolution is to survive, it
must eliminate the bourgeois machinery of state: "All revolutions
perfected this machine instead of breaking it." Lenin later wrote:
"This conclusion is the chief and fundamental point in the Marxist
theory of the State."

THE EIGHTEENTH BRUMAIRE OF LOUIS NAPOLEON

NOTE: Parts I and VII are translated by Saul K. Padover from the
German edition of 1869; Parts II to VI are based on the third edition,
prepared by Engels (1885), as translated and published by Progress
Publishers, Moscow, 1937. Transcribed for the Internet by
director@marx.org in June 1995.

+ Marx's 1869 preface + Part I + Part II + Part III + Part IV + Part V
+ Part VI + Part VII

Karl Marx's THE EIGHTEENTH BRUMAIRE OF LOUIS NAPOLEON

Written between December 1851 and February 1852.

Originally published in Die Revolution (a New York German-language
monthly). Later editions (such as a 1869, Hamburg) were titled The
Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte.

NOTE: Parts I and VII are translated by the Saul K. Padover from the
German edition of 1869; Parts II to VI are based on the third edition,
prepared by Engels (1885), as translated and published by Progress
Publishers, Moscow, 1937.

MARX'S PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION, London, June 25, 1869

MY FRIEND Joseph Weydemeyer, whose death was so untimely, intended to
publish a political weekly in New York starting from January 1,
1852. He invited me to provide this weekly with a history of the coup
d'etat. Down to the middle of February, I accordingly wrote him weekly
articles under the title The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis
Bonaparte. Meanwhile, Weydemeyer's original plan had fallen
through. Instead, in the spring of I852 he began to publish a monthly,
Die Revolution, whose first number consists of my Eighteenth
Brumaire. A few hundred copies of this found their way into Germany at
that time, without, however, getting into the actual book market. A
German bookseller of extremely radical pretensions to whom I offered
the sale of my book was most virtuously horrified at a "presumption"
so "contrary to the times."

From the above facts it will be seen that the present work took shape
under the immediate pressure of events and its historical material
does not extend beyond the month of February, 1852. Its republication
now is due in part to the demand of the book trade, in part to the
urgent requests of my friends in Germany.

Of the writings dealing with the same subject at approximately the
same time as mine, only two deserve notice: Victor Hugo's Napoleon le
Petit and Proudhon's Coup d'Etat. Victor Hugo confines himself to
bitter and witty invective against the responsible producer of the
coup d'etat. The event itself appears in his work like a bolt from the
blue. He sees in it only the violent act of a single individual. He
does not notice that he makes this individual great instead of little
by ascribing to him a personal power of initiative unparalleled in
world history. Proudhon, for his part, seeks to represent the coup
d'etat as the result of an antecedent historical
development. Inadvertently, however, his historical construction of
the coup d'etat becomes a historical apologia for its hero. Thus he
falls into the error of our so-called objective historians. I, on the
contrary, demonstrate how the class struggle in France created
circumstances and relationships that made it possible for a grotesque
mediocrity to play a hero's part.

A revision of the present work would have robbed it of its particular
coloring. Accordingly, I have confined myself to mere correction of
printer's errors and to striking out allusions now no longer
intelligible.

The concluding words of my work: "But when the imperial mantle finally
falls on the shoulders of Louis Bonaparte, the bronze statue of
Napoleon will come crashing down from the top of the Vendome Column,"
have already been fulfilled. Colonel Charras opened the attack on the
Napoleon cult in his work on the campaign of 1815. Subsequently, and
especially in the past few years, French literature has made an end of
the Napoleon legend with the weapons of historical research,
criticism, satire, and wit. Outside France, this violent breach with
the traditional popular belief, this tremendous mental revolution, has
been little noticed and still less understood.

Lastly, I hope that my work will contribute toward eliminating the
school-taught phrase now current, particularly in Germany, of
so-called Caesarism. In this superficial historical analogy the main
point is forgotten, namely, that in ancient Rome the class struggle
took place only within a privileged minority, between the free rich
and the free poor, while the great productive mass of the population,
the slaves, formed the purely passive pedestal for these
combatants. People forget Sismondi's significant saying: The Roman
proletariat lived at the expense of society, while modern society
lives at the expense of the proletariat. With so complete a difference
between the material, economic conditions of the ancient and the
modern class struggles, the political figures produced by them can
likewise have no more in common with one another than the Archbishop
of Canterbury has with the High Priest Samuel.

Karl Marx's THE EIGHTEENTH BRUMAIRE OF LOUIS NAPOLEON

I

Hegel remarks somewhere that all great world-historic facts and
personages appear, so to speak, twice. He forgot to add: the first
time as tragedy, the second time as farce. Caussidiere for Danton,
Louis Blanc for Robespierre, the Montagne of 1848 to 1851 for the
Montagne of 1793 to 1795, the nephew for the uncle. And the same
caricature occurs in the circumstances of the second edition of the
Eighteenth Brumaire.

Men make their own history, but they do not make it as they please;
they do not make it under self-selected circumstances, but under
circumstances existing already, given and transmitted from the
past. The tradition of all dead generations weighs like an Alp on the
brains of the living. And just as they seem to be occupied with
revolutionizing themselves and things, creating something that did not
exist before, precisely in such epochs of revolutionary crisis they
anxiously conjure up the spirits of the past to their service,
borrowing from them names, battle slogans, and costumes in order to
present this new scene in world history in this time-honored disguise
and this borrowed language. Thus Luther put on the mask of the Apostle
Paul, the Revolution of 1789-18I4 draped itself alternately in the
guise of the Roman Republic and the Roman Empire, and the Revolution
of 1848 knew nothing better to do than to parody, now I789, now the
revolutionary tradition of I793-95. In like manner, the beginner who
has learned a new language always translates it back into his mother
tongue, but he assimilates the spirit of the new language and
expresses himself freely in it only when he moves in it without
recalling the old and when he forgets his native tongue.

When we think about this conjuring up of the dead of world history, a
salient difference reveals itself. Camille Desmoulins, Danton,
Robespierre, St. Just, Napoleon, the heroes as well as the parties and
the masses of the old French Revolution, performed the task of their
time -- that of unchaining and establishing modern bourgeois society
-- in Roman costumes and with Roman phrases. The first one destroyed
the feudal foundation and cut off the feudal heads that had grown on
it. The other created inside France the only conditions under which
free competition could be developed, parceled-out land properly used,
and the unfettered productive power of the nation employed; and beyond
the French borders it swept away feudal institutions everywhere, to
provide, as far as necessary, bourgeois society in France with an
appropriate up-to-date environment on the European continent. Once the
new social formation was established, the antediluvian colossi
disappeared and with them also the resurrected Romanism -- the
Brutuses, the Gracchi, the publicolas, the tribunes, the senators, and
Caesar himself. Bourgeois society in its sober reality bred its own
true interpreters and spokesmen in the Says, Cousins, Royer-Collards,
Benjamin Constants, and Guizots; its real military leaders sat behind
the office desk and the hog-headcd Louis XVIII was its political
chief. Entirely absorbed in the production of wealth and in peaceful
competitive struggle, it no longer remembered that the ghosts of the
Roman period had watched over its cradle. But unheroic though
bourgeois society is, it nevertheless needed heroism, sacrifice,
terror, civil war, and national wars to bring it into being. And in
the austere classical traditions of the Roman Republic the bourgeois
gladiators found the ideals and the art forms, the self-deceptions,
that they needed to conceal from themselves the bourgeois-limited
content of their struggles and to keep their passion on the high plane
of great historic tragedy. Similarly, at another stage of development
a century earlier, Cromwell and the English people had borrowed from
the Old Testament the speech, emotions, and illusions for their
bourgeois revolution. When the real goal had been achieved and the
bourgeois transformation of English society had been accomplished,
Locke supplanted Habakkuk.

Thus the awakening of the dead in those revolutions served the purpose
of glorifying the new struggles, not of parodying the old; of
magnifying the given task in the imagination, not recoiling from its
solution in reality; of finding once more the spirit of revolution,
not making its ghost walk again.

From 1848 to 1851, only the ghost of the old revolution circulated --
from Marrast, the republican in yellow [kid] gloves who disguised
himself as old Bailly, down to the adventurer who hides his trivial
and repulsive features behind the iron death mask of Napoleon. A whole
nation, which thought it had acquired an accelerated power of motion
by means of a revolution, suddenly finds itself set back into a
defunct epoch, and to remove any doubt about the relapse, the old
dates arise again -- the old chronology, the old names, the old
edicts, which had long since become a subject of antiquarian
scholarship, and the old minions of the law who had seemed long
dead. The nation feels like the mad Englishman in Bedlam who thinks he
is living in the time of the old Pharaohs and daily bewails the hard
labor he must perform in the Ethiopian gold mines, immured in this
subterranean prison, a pale lamp fastened to his head, the overseer of
the slaves behind him with a long whip, and at the exits a confused
welter of barbarian war slaves who understand neither the forced
laborers nor each other, since they speak no common language. "And all
this," sighs the mad Englishman, "is expected of me, a freeborn
Briton, in order to make gold for the Pharaohs." "In order to pay the
debts of the Bonaparte family," sighs the French nation. The
Englishman, so long as he was not in his right mind, could not get rid
of his idee fixe of mining gold. The French, so long as they were
engaged in revolution, could not get rid of the memory of Napoleon, as
the election of December 10 proved. They longed to return from the
perils of revolution to the fleshpots of Egypt, and December 2, 1851,
was the answer. Now they have not only a caricature of the old
Napoleon, but the old Napoleon himself, caricatured as he would have
to be in the middle of the nineteenth century.

The social revolution of the nineteenth century cannot take its poetry
from the past but only from the future. It cannot begin with itself
before it has stripped away all superstition about the past. The
former revolutions required recollections of past world history in
order to smother their own content. The revolution of the nineteenth
century must let the dead bury their dead in order to arrive at its
own content. There the phrase went beyond the content -- here the
content goes beyond the phrase.

The February Revolution was a surprise attack, a seizing of the old
society unawares, and the people proclaimed this unexpected stroke a
deed of world importance, ushering in a new epoch. On December 2 the
February Revolution is conjured away as a cardsharp's trick, and what
seems overthrown is no longer the monarchy but the liberal concessions
that had been wrung from it through centuries of struggle. Instead of
society having conquered a new content for itself, it seems that the
state has only returned to its oldest form, to a shamelessly simple
rule by the sword and the monk's cowl. This is the answer to the coup
de main of February, 1848, given by the coup de tete of December,
1851. Easy come, easy go. Meantime, the interval did not pass
unused. During 1848-51 French society, by an abbreviated because
revolutionary method, caught up with the studies and experiences which
in a regular, so to speak, textbook course of development would have
preceded the February Revolution, if the latter were to be more than a
mere ruffling of the surface. Society seems now to have retreated to
behind its starting point; in truth, it has first to create for itself
the revolutionary point of departure-the situation, the relations, the
conditions under which alone modern revolution becomes serious.

Bourgeois revolutions like those of the eighteenth century storm more
swiftly from success to success, their dramatic effects outdo each
other, men and things seem set in sparkling diamonds, ecstasy is the
order of the day- but they are short-lived, soon they have reached
their zenith, and a long Katzenjammer [crapulence] takes hold of
society before it learns to assimilate the results of its
storm-and-stress period soberly. On the other hand, proletarian
revolutions like those of the nineteenth century constantly criticize
themselves, constantly interrupt themselves in their own course,
return to the apparently accomplished, in order to begin anew; they
deride with cruel thoroughness the half-measures, weaknesses, and
paltriness of their first attempts, seem to throw down their opponents
only so the latter may draw new strength from the earth and rise
before them again more gigantic than ever, recoil constantly from the
indefinite colossalness of their own goals -- until a situation is
created which makes all turning back impossible, and the conditions
themselves call out: Hic Rhodus, hic salta!

["Here is the rose, here dance!" From Aesop's fable, "The Swaggerer,"
referring to one who boasted that he had made a gigantic leap in
Rhodes (which also means "rose" in Greek) and was challenged: "Here is
Rhodes, here leap!" Marx's paraphrase, "Here is the rose, here dance,"
is from the quotation used by Hegel in the preface to his book
Outlines of the Philosophy of Right (182I). -- Ed.]

For the rest, every fair observer, even if he had not followed the
course of French developments step by step, must have had a
presentiment of the imminence of an unheard-of disgrace for the
revolution. It was enough to hear the complacent yelps of victory with
which the democrats congratulated each other on the expectedly
gracious consequences of the second Sunday in May, 1852. In their
minds that second Sunday of May had become an idee fixe, a dogma, like
the day of Christ's reappearance and the beginning of the millennium
in the minds of the chiliasts. As always, weakness had taken refuge in
a belief in miracles, believed the enemy to be overcome when he was
only conjured away in imagination, and lost all understanding of the
present in an inactive glorification of the future that was in store
for it and the deeds it had in mind but did not want to carry out
yet. Those heroes who seek to disprove their demonstrated incapacity
by offering each other their sympathy and getting together in a crowd
had tied up their bundles, collected their laurel wreaths in advance,
and occupied themselves with discounting on the exchange market the
republics in partibus for which they had already providently organized
the government personnel with all the calm of their unassuming
disposition. December 2 struck them like a thunderbolt from a clear
sky, and those who in periods of petty depression gladly let their
inner fears be drowned by the loudest renters will perhaps have
convinced themselves that the times are past when the cackle of geese
could save the Capitol.

The constitution, the National Assembly, the dynastic parties, the
blue and red republicans, the heroes of Africa, the thunder from the
platform, the sheet lightning of the daily press, the entire
literature, the political names and the intellectual reputations, the
civil law and the penal code, liberti, egalite, fraternite, and the
second Sunday in May, 1852 -- all have vanished like a phantasmagoria
before the spell of a man whom even his enemies do not make out to be
a sorcerer. Universal suffrage seems to have survived only for the
moment, so that with its own hand it may make its last will and
testament before the eyes of all the world and declare in the name of
the people itself: "All that exists deserves to perish." [From
Goethe's Faust, Part One. -- Ed.]

It is not enough to say, as the French do, that their nation was taken
unawares. Nations and women are not forgiven the unguarded hour in
which the first adventurer who came along could violate them. Such
turns of speech do not solve the riddle but only formulate it
differently. It remains to be explained how a nation of thirty-six
millions can be surprised and delivered without resistance into
captivity by three knights of industry.

Let us recapitulate in general outline the phases that the French
Revolution went through from February 24, 1848, to December, 1851.

Three main periods are unmistakable: the February period; the period
of the constitution of the republic or the Constituent National
Assembly -- May 1848, to May 28, 1849; and the period of the
constitutional republic or the Legislative National Assembly -- May
28, 1849, to December 2, 1851.

The first period -- from February 24, the overthrow of Louis Philippe,
to May 4, 1848, the meeting of the Constituent Assembly -- the
February period proper, may be designated as the prologue of the
revolution. Its character was officially expressed in the fact that
the government it improvised itself declared that it was provisional,
and like the government, everything that was mentioned, attempted, or
enunciated during this period proclaimed itself to be only
provisional. Nobody and nothing ventured to lay any claim to the right
of existence and of real action. All the elements that had prepared or
determined the revolution -- the dynastic opposition, the republican
bourgeoisie, the democratic-republican petty bourgeoisie, and the
social-democratic workers, provisionally found their place in the
February government.

It could not be otherwise. The February days originally intended an
electoral reform by which the circle of the politically privileged
among the possessing class itself was to be widened and the exclusive
domination of the aristocracy of finance overthrown. When it came to
the actual conflict, however -- when the people mounted the
barricades, the National Guard maintained a passive attitude, the army
offered no serious resistance, and the monarchy ran away -- the
republic appeared to be a matter of course. Every party construed it
in its own way. Having secured it arms in hand, the proletariat
impressed its stamp upon it and proclaimed it to be a social
republic. There was thus indicated the general content of the modern
revolution, a content which was in most singular contradiction to
everything that, with the material available, with the degree of
education attained by the masses, under the given circumstances and
relations, could be immediately realized in practice. On the other
hand, the claims of all the remaining elements that had collaborated
in the February Revolution were recognized by the lion's share they
obtained in the government. In no period, therefore, do we find a more
confused mixture of high-flown phrases and actual uncertainty and
clumsiness, of more enthusiastic striving for innovation and more
deeply rooted domination of the old routine, of more apparent harmony
of the whole of society; and more profound estrangement of its
elements. While the Paris proletariat still reveled in the vision of
the wide prospects that had opened before it and indulged in seriously
meant discussions of social problems, the old powers of society had
grouped themselves, assembled, reflected, and found unexpected support
in the mass of the nation, the peasants and petty bourgeois, who all
at once stormed onto the political stage after the barriers of the
July Monarchy had fallen.

The second period, from May 4, 1848, to the end of May, 1849, is the
period of the constitution, the foundation, of the bourgeois
republic. Immediately after the February days not only had the
dynastic opposition been surprised by the republicans and the
republicans by the socialists, but all France by Paris. The National
Assembly, which met on May 4, 1848, had emerged from the national
elections and represented the nation. It was a living protest against
the pretensions of the February days and was to reduce the results of
the revolution to the bourgeois scale. In vain the Paris proletariat,
which immediately grasped the character of this National Assembly,
attempted on May 15, a few days after it met, to negate its existence
forcibly, to dissolve it, to disintegrate again into its constituent
parts the organic form in which the proletariat was threatened by the
reacting spirit of the nation. As is known, May 15 had no other result
but that of removing Blanqui and his comrades -- that is, the real
leaders of the proletarian party -- from the public stage for the
entire duration of the cycle we are considering.

The bourgeois monarchy of Louis Philippe can be followed only by a
bourgeois republic; that is to say, whereas a limited section of the
bourgeoisie ruled in the name of the king, the whole of the
bourgeoisie will now rule in the name of the people. The demands of
the Paris proletariat are utopian nonsense, to which an end must be
put. To this declaration of the Constituent National Assembly the
Paris proletariat replied with the June insurrection, the most
colossal event in the history of European civil wars. The bourgeois
republic triumphed. On its side stood the aristocracy of finance, the
industrial bourgeoisie, the middle class, the petty bourgeois, the
army, the lumpen proletariat organized as the Mobile Guard, the
intellectual lights, the clergy, and the rural population. On the side
of the Paris proletariat stood none but itself. More than three
thousand insurgents were butchered after the victory, and fifteen
thousand were deported without trial. With this defeat the proletariat
passes into the background on the revolutionary stage. It attempts to
press forward again on every occasion, as soon as the movement appears
to make a fresh start, but with ever decreased expenditure of strength
and always slighter results. As soon as one of the social strata above
it gets into revolutionary ferment, the proletariat enters into an
alliance with it and so shares all the defeats that the different
parties suffer, one after another. But these subsequent blows become
the weaker, the greater the surface of society over which they are
distributed. The more important leaders of the proletariat in the
Assembly and in the press successively fall victim to the courts, and
ever more equivocal figures come to head it. In part it throws itself
into doctrinaire experiments, exchange banks and workers'
associations, hence into a movement in which it renounces the
revolutionizing of the old world by means of the latter's own great,
combined resources, and seeks, rather, to achieve its salvation behind
society's back, in private fashion, within its limited conditions of
existence, and hence necessarily suffers shipwreck. It seems to be
unable either to rediscover revolutionary greatness in itself or to
win new energy from the connections newly entered into, until all
classes with which it contended in June themselves lie prostrate
beside it. But at least it succumbs with the honors of the great,
world-historic struggle; not only France, but all Europe trembles at
the June earthquake, while the ensuing defeats of the upper classes
are so cheaply bought that they require barefaced exaggeration by the
victorious party to be able to pass for events at au, and become the
more ignominious the further the defeated party is removed from the
proletarian party.

The defeat of the June insurgents, to be sure, had now prepared, had
leveled the ground on which the bourgeois republic could be founded
and built, but it had shown at the same time that in Europe the
questions at issue are other than that of "republic or monarchy." It
had revealed that here "bourgeois republic" signifies the unlimited
despotism of one class over other classes. It had proved that in
countries with an old civilization, with a developed formation of
classes, with modern conditions of production, and with an
intellectual consciousness in which all traditional ideas have been
dissolved by the work of centuries, the republic signifies in general
only the political form of revolution of bourgeois society and not its
conservative form of life -- as, for example, in the United States of
North America, where, though classes already exist, they have not yet
become fixed, but continually change and interchange their elements in
constant flux, where the modern means of production, instead of
coinciding with a stagnant surplus population, rather compensate for
the relative deficiency of heads and hands, and where, finally, the
feverish, youthful movement of material production, which has to make
a new world of its own, has neither time nor opportunity left for
abolishing the old world of ghosts.

During the June days all classes and parties had united in the party
of Order against the proletarian class as the party of anarchy, of
socialism, of communism. They had "saved" society from "the enemies of
society." They had given out the watchwords of the old society,
"property, family, religion, order," to their army as passwords and
had proclaimed to the counterrevolutionary crusaders: "In this sign
thou shalt conquer! " From that moment, as soon as one of the numerous
parties which gathered under this sign against the June insurgents
seeks to hold the revolutionary battlefield in its own class interest,
it goes down before the cry: "Property, family, religion, order."
Society is saved just as often as the circle of its rulers contracts,
as a more exclusive interest is maintained against a wider one. Every
demand of the simplest bourgeois financial reform, of the most
ordinary liberalism, of the most formal republicanism, of the most
shallow democracy, is simultaneously castigated as an "attempt on
society" and stigmatized as "socialism." And finally the high priests
of "religion and order" themselves are driven with kicks from their
Pythian tripods, hauled out of their beds in the darkness of night,
put in prison vans, thrown into dungeons or sent into exile; their
temple is razed to the ground, their mouths are sealed, their pens
broken, their law torn to pieces in the name of religion, of property,
of the family, of order. Bourgeois fanatics for order are shot down on
their balconies by mobs of drunken soldiers, their domestic
sanctuaries profaned, their houses bombarded for amusement -- in the
name of property, of the family, of religion, and of order. Finally,
the scum of bourgeois society forms the holy phalanx of order and the
hero Crapulinski installs himself in the Tuileries as the "savior of
society."

II

Let us pick up the threads of the development once more.

The history of the Constituent National Assembly since the June days
is the history of the domination and the disintegration of the
republican faction of the bourgeoisie, of the faction known by the
names of tricolor republicans, pure republicans, political
republicans, formalist republicans, etc.

Under the bourgeois monarchy of Louis Philippe it had formed the
official republican opposition and consequently a recognized component
part of the political world of the day. It had its representatives in
the Chambers and a considerable sphere of influence in the press. Its
Paris organ, the National, was considered just as respectable in its
way as the Journal des Debats. Its character corresponded to this
position under the constitutional monarchy. It was not a faction of
the bourgeoisie held together by great common interests and marked off
by specific conditions of production. It was a clique of
republican-minded bourgeois, writers, lawyers, officers, and officials
that owed its influence to the personal antipathies of the country to
Louis Philippe, to memories of the old republic, to the republican
faith of a number of enthusiasts, above all, however, to French
nationalism, whose hatred of the Vienna treaties and of the alliance
with England it stirred up perpetually. A large part of the following
the National had under Louis Philippe was due to this concealed
imperialism, which could consequently confront it later, under the
republic, as a deadly rival in the person of Louis Bonaparte. It
fought the aristocracy of finance, as did all the rest of the
bourgeois opposition. Polemics against the budget, which in France
were closely connected with fighting the aristocracy of finance,
procured popularity too cheaply and material for puritanical leading
articles too plentifully not to be exploited. The industrial
bourgeoisie was grateful to it for its slavish defense of the French
protectionist system, which it accepted, however, more on national
grounds than on grounds of national economy; the bourgeoisie as a
whole, for its vicious denunciation of communism and socialism. For
the rest, the party of the National was purely republican; that is, it
demanded a republican instead of a monarchist form of bourgeois rule
and, above all, the lion's share of this rule. About the conditions of
this transformation it was by no means clear in its own mind. On the
other hand, what was clear as daylight to it, and was publicly
acknowledged at the reform banquets in the last days of Louis
Philippe, was its unpopularity with the democratic petty bourgeois,
and in particular with the revolutionary proletariat. These pure
republicans, as is indeed the way with pure republicans, were already
at the point of contenting themselves in the first instance with a
regency of the Duchess of Orleans when the February Revolution broke
out and assigned their best-known representatives a place in the
Provisional Government. From the start they naturally had the
confidence of the bourgeoisie and a majority in the Constituent
National Assembly. The socialist elements of the Provisional
Government were excluded forthwith from the Executive Commission which
the National Assembly formed when it met, and the party of the
National took advantage of the outbreak of the June insurrection to
discharge the Executive Commission also, and therewith to get rid of
its closest rivals, the petty-bourgeois, or democratic, republicans
(Ledru-Rollin, etc.). Cavaignac, the general of the
bourgeois-republican part who commanded the June massacre, took the
place of the Executive Commission with a sort of dictatorial
power. Marrast, former editor in chief of the National, became the
perpetual president of the Constituent National Assembly, and the
ministries, as well as all other important posts, fell to the portion
of the pure republicans.

The republican bourgeois faction, which had long regarded itself as
the legitimate heir of the July Monarchy, thus found its fondest hopes
exceeded; it attained power, however, not as it had dreamed under
Louis Philippe, through a liberal revolt of the bourgeoisie against
the throne, but through a rising of the proletariat against capital, a
rising laid low with grapeshot. What it had conceived as the most
revolutionary event turned out in reality to be the most
counterrevolutionary. The fruit fell into its lap, but it fell from
the tree of knowledge, not from the tree of life.

The exclusive rule of the bourgeois republicans lasted only from June
24 to December 10, 1848. It is summed up in the drafting of a
republican constitution and in the state of siege of Paris.

The new constitution was at bottom only the republicanized edition of
the constitutional Charter of 1830. The narrow electoral qualification
of the July Monarchy, which excluded even a large part of the
bourgeoisie from political rule, was incompatible with the existence
of the bourgeois republic. In lieu of this qualification, the February
Revolution had at once proclaimed direct universal suffrage. The
bourgeois republicans could not undo this event. They had to content
themselves with adding the limiting proviso of a six months' residence
in the constituency. The old organization of the administration, the
municipal system, the judicial system, the army, etc., continued to
exist inviolate, or, where the constitution changed them, the change
concerned the table of contents, not the contents; the name, not the
subject matter.

The inevitable general staff of the liberties of 1848, personal
liberty, liberty of the press, of speech, of association, of assembly,
of education and religion, etc., received a constitutional uniform
which made them invulnerable. For each of these liberties is
proclaimed as the absolute right of the French citoyen, but always
with the marginal note that it is unlimited so far as it is not
limited by the "equal rights of others and the public safety" or by
"laws" which are intended to mediate just this harmony of the
individual liberties with one another and with the public safety. For
example: "The citizens have the right of association, of peaceful and
unarmed assembly, of petition and of expressing their opinions,
whether in the press or in any other way. The enjoyment of these
rights has no limit save the equal rights of others and the public
safety." "Education is free. Freedom of education shall be enjoyed
under the conditions fixed by law and under the supreme control of the
state." "The home of every citizen is inviolable except in the forms
prescribed by law." The constitution, therefore, constantly refers to
future organic laws which are to put into affect those marginal notes
and regulate the enjoyment of these unrestricted liberties in such
manner that they will collide neither with one another nor with the
public safety. And later these organic laws were brought into being by
the friends of order and all those liberties regulated in such manner
that the bourgeoisie in its enjoyment of them finds itself unhindered
by the equal rights of the other classes. Where it forbids these
liberties entirely to "the others," or permits enjoyment of them under
conditions that are just so many police traps, this always happens
solely in the interest of "public safety" -- that is, the safety of
the bourgeoisie -- as the constitution prescribes. In the sequel, both
sides accordingly appeal with complete justice to the constitution:
the friends of order, who abrogated all these liberties, as well as
the democrats, who demanded all of them. For each paragraph of the
constitution contains its own antithesis, its own upper and lower
house, namely, liberty in the general phrase, abrogation of liberty in
the marginal note. Thus so long as the name of freedom was respected
and only its actual realization prevented, of course in a legal way,
the constitutional existence of liberty remained intact, inviolate,
however mortal the blows dealt to its existence in actual life.

This constitution, made inviolable in so ingenious a manner, was
nevertheless, like Achilles, vulnerable in one point -- not in the
heel, but in the head, or rather in the two heads it wound up with:
the Legislative Assembly on the one hand, the President on the
other. Glance through the constitution and you will find that only the
paragraphs in which the relationship of the President to the
Legislative Assembly is defined are absolute, positive,
noncontradictory, and cannot be distorted. For here it was a question
of the bourgeois republicans safeguarding themselves. Articles 45-70
of the Constitution are so worded that the National Assembly can
remove the President constitutionally, whereas the President can
remove the National Assembly only unconstitutionally, only by setting
aside the constitution itself. Here, therefore, it challenges its
forcible destruction. It not only sanctifies the division of powers,
like the Charter of i830, it widens it into an intolerable
contradiction. The play of the constitutional powers, as Guizot termed
the parliamentary squabble between the legislative and executive
power, is in the constitution of 1848 continually played va-banque
[staking all]. On one side are seven hundred and fifty representatives
of the people, elected by universal suffrage and eligible for
reelection; they form an uncontrollable, indissoluble, indivisible
National Assembly, a National Assembly that enjoys legislative
omnipotence, decides in the last instance on war, peace, and
commercial treaties, alone possesses the right of amnesty, and, by its
permanence, perpetually holds the front of the stage. On the other
side is the President, with all the attributes of royal power, with
authority to appoint and dismiss his ministers independently of the
National Assembly, with all the resources of the executive power in
his hands, bestowing all posts and disposing thereby in France of the
livelihoods of at least a million and a half people, for so many
depend on the five hundred thousand officials and officers of every
rank. He has the whole of the armed forces behind him. He enjoys the
privilege of pardoning individual criminals, of suspending National
Guards, of discharging, with the concurrence of the Council of State,
general, cantonal, and municipal councils elected by the citizens
themselves. Initiative and direction arc reserved to him in all
treaties with foreign countries. While the Assembly constantly
performs on the boards and is exposed to daily public criticism, he
leads a secluded life in the Elysian Fields, and that with Article 45
of the constitution before his eyes and in his heart, crying to him
daily: "Frere, il faut mourir!" ["Brother, one must die!"] Your power
ceases on the second Sunday of the lovely month of May in the fourth
year after your election! Then your glory is at an end, the piece is
not played twice, and if you have debts, look to it quickly that you
pay them off with the 600,000 francs granted you by the constitution,
unless, perchance, you prefer to go to Clichy on the second Monday of
the lovely month of May! Thus, whereas the constitution assigns power
to the President, it seeks to secure moral power for the National
Assembly. Apart from the fact that it is impossible to create a moral
power by paragraphs of law, the constitution here abrogates itself
once more by having the President elected by all Frenchmen through
direct suffrage. While the votes of France are split up among the
seven hundred and fifty members of the National Assembly, they are
here, on the contrary, concentrated on a single individual. While each
separate representative of the people represents only this or that
party, this or that town, this or that bridgehead, or even only the
mere necessity of electing someone as the seven hundred and fiftieth,
without examining too closely either the cause or the man, he is the
elect of the nation and the act of his election is the trump that the
sovereign people plays once every four years. The elected National
Assembly stands in a metaphysical relation, but the elected President
in a personal relation, to the nation. The National Assembly, indeed,
exhibits in its individual representatives the manifold aspects of the
national spirit, but in the President this national spirit finds its
incarnation. As against the Assembly, he possesses a sort of divine
right; he is President by the grace of the people.

Thetis, the sea goddess, prophesied to Achilles that he would die in
the bloom of youth. The constitution, which, like Achilles, had its
weak spot, also had, like Achilles, a presentiment that it must go to
an early death. It was sufficient for the constitution-making pure
republicans to cast a glance from the lofty heaven of their ideal
republic at the profane world to perceive how the arrogance of the
royalists, the Bonapartists, the democrats, the communists, as well as
their own discredit, grew daily in the same measure as they approached
the completion of their great legislative work of art, without Thetis
on this account having to leave the sea and communicate the secret to
them. They sought to cheat destiny by a catch in the constitution,
through Article III according to which every motion for a revision of
the constitution must be supported by at least three-quarters of the
votes, cast in three successive debates with an entire month between
each, with the added proviso that not less than five hundred members
of the National Assembly must vote. Thereby they merely made the
impotent attempt to continue exercising a power -- when only a
parliamentary minority, as which they already saw themselves
prophetically in their mind's eye -- a power which at that time, when
they commanded a parliamentary majority and all the resources of
governmental authority, was daily slipping more and more from their
feeble hands.

Finally the constitution, in a melodramatic paragraph, entrusts itself
"to the vigilance and the patriotism of the whole French people and
every single Frenchman," after it has previously entrusted in another
paragraph the "vigilant" and "patriotic" to the tender, most
painstaking care of the High Court of Justice, the haute cour it
invented for the purpose.

Such was the Constitution of 1848, which on December 2, 1851, was not
overthrown by a head, but fell down at the touch of a mere hat; this
hat, to be sure, was a three-cornered Napoleonic hat.

While the bourgeois republicans in the Assembly were busy devising,
discussing, and voting this constitution, Cavaignac outside the
Assembly maintained the state of siege of Paris. The state of siege of
Paris was the midwife of the Constituent Assembly in its travail of
republican creation. If the constitution is subsequently put out of
existence by bayonets, it must not be forgotten that it was likewise
by bayonets, and these turned against the people, that it had to be
protected in its mother's womb and by bayonets that it had to be
brought into existence. The forefathers of the "respectable
republicans" had sent their symbol, the tricolor, on a tour around
Europe. They themselves in turn produced an invention that of itself
made its way over the whole Continent, but returned to France with
ever renewed love until it has now become naturalized in half her
departments-the state of siege. A splendid invention, periodically
employed in every ensuing crisis in the course of the French
Revolution. But barrack and bivouac, which were thus periodically laid
on French society's head to compress its brain and render it quiet;
saber and musket, which were periodically allowed to act as judges and
administrators, as guardians and censors, to play policeman and do
night watchman's duty; mustache and uniform, which were periodically
trumpeted forth as the highest wisdom of society and as its rector --
were not barrack and bivouac, saber and musket, mustache and uniform
finally bound to hit upon the idea of instead saving society once and
for all by proclaiming their own regime as the highest and freeing
civil society completely from the trouble of governing itself? Barrack
and bivouac, saber and musket, mustache and uniform were bound to hit
upon this idea all the more as they might then also expect better cash
payment for their higher services, whereas from the merely periodic
state of siege and the transient rescues of society at the bidding of
this or that bourgeois faction, little of substance was gleaned save
some killed and wounded and some friendly bourgeois grimaces. Should
not the military at last one day play state of siege in their own
interest and for their own benefit, and at the same time besiege the
citizens' purses? Moreover, be it noted in passing, one must not
forget that Colonel Bernard, the same military commission president
who under Cavaignac had fifteen thousand insurgents deported without
trial, is at this moment again at the head of the military commissions
active in Paris.

Whereas with the state of siege in Paris, the respectable, the pure
republicans planted the nursery in which the praetorians of December
2, 1851, were to grow up, they on the other hand deserve praise for
the reason that, instead of exaggerating the national sentiment as
under Louis Philippe, they now, when they had command of the national
power, crawled before foreign countries, and instead of setting Italy
free, let her be reconquered by Austrians and Neapolitans. Louis
Bonaparte's election as President on December 10, 1848, put an end to
the dictatorship of Cavaignac and to the Constituent Assembly.

In Article 44 of the Constitution it is stated: "The President of the
French Republic must never have lost his status of French citizen."
The first President of the French Republic, L. N. Bonaparte, had not
merely lost his status of French citizen, had not only been In English
special constable, he was even a naturalized Swiss.

I have worked out elsewhere the significance of the election of
December 10. I will not revert to it here. It is sufficient to remark
here that it was a reaction of the peasants, who had had to pay the
costs of the February Revolution, against the remaining classes of the
nation; a reaction o@ the country against the town. It met with great
approval in the army, for which the republicans of the National had
provided neither glory nor additional pay; among the big bourgeoisie,
which hailed Bonaparte as a bridge to monarchy-, among the
proletarians and petty bourgeois, who hailed him as a scourge for
Cavaignac. I shall have an opportunity later of going more closely
into the relationship of the peasants to the French Revolution.

The period from December 20, 1848, until the dissolution of the
Constituent Assembly in May, 1849, comprises the history of the
downfall of the bourgeois republicans. After having founded a republic
for the bourgeoisie, driven the revolutionary proletariat out of the
field, and reduced the democratic petty bourgeoisie to silence for the
time being, they are themselves thrust aside by the mass of the
bourgeoisie, which justly impounds this republic as its property. This
bourgeois mass was, however, royalist. One section of it, the large
landowners, had ruled during the Restoration and was accordingly
Legitimist. The other, the aristocrats of finance and big
industrialists, had ruled during the July Monarchy and was
consequently Orleanist. The high dignitaries of the army, the
university, the church, the bar, the academy, and the press were to be
found on either side, though in various proportions. Here, in the
bourgeois republic, which bore neither the name Bourbon nor the name
Orleans, but the name capital, they had found the form of state in
which they could rule conjointly. The June insurrection had already
united them in the party of Order. Now it was necessary, in the first
place, to remove the coterie of bourgeois republicans who still
occupied the seats of the National Assembly. Just as brutal as these
pure republicans had been in their misuse of physical force against
the people, just as cowardly, mealy-mouthed, broken-spirited, and
incapable of fighting were they now in their retreat, when it was a
question of maintaining their republicanism and their legislative
rights against the executive power and the royalists. I need not
relate here the ignominious history of their dissolution. They did not
succumb; they passed out of existence. Their history has come to an
end forever, and, both inside and outside the Assembly, they figure in
the following period only as memories, memories that seem to regain
life whenever the mere name republic is once more the issue and as
often as the revolutionary conflict threatens to sink down to the
lowest level. I may remark in passing that the journal which gave its
name to this party, the National, was converted to socialism in the
following period.

Before we finish with this period we must still cast a retrospective
glance at the two powers, one of which annihilated the other on
December 2, 1851, whereas from December 20, 1848, until the exit of
the Constituent Assembly, they had lived in conjugal relations. We
mean Louis Bonaparte, on the one hand, and the part of the coalesced
royalists, the party of Order, of the big bourgeoisie, on the
other. On acceding to the presidency, Bonaparte at once formed a
ministry of the party of Order, at the head of which he placed Odilon
Barrot, the old leader, notabene, of the most liberal faction of the
parliamentary bourgeoisie. M. Barrot had at last secured the
ministerial portfolio whose image had haunted him since 1830, and what
is more, the premiership in the ministry; but not, as he had imagined
under Louis Philippe, as the most advanced leader of the parliamentary
opposition, but with the task of putting a parliament to death, and as
the confederate of all his archenemies, Jesuits and Legitimists. He
brought the bride home at last, but only after she had been
prostituted. Bonaparte seemed to efface himself completely. This party
acted for him.

The very first meeting of the council of ministers resolved on the
expedition to Rome, which, it was agreed, should be undertaken behind
the back of the National Assembly and the means for which were to be
wrested from it under false pretenses. Thus they began by swindling
the National Assembly and secretly conspiring with the absolutist
powers abroad against the revolutionary Roman republic.

In the same manner and with the same maneuvers Bonaparte prepared his
coup of December 2 against the royalist Legislative Assembly and its
constitutional republic. Let us not forget that the same party which
formed Bonaparte's ministry on December 20, 1848, formed the majority
of the Legislative National Assembly on December 2, 1851.

In August the Constituent Assembly had decided to dissolve only after
it had worked out and promulgated a whole series of organic laws that
were to supplement the constitution. On January 6, 1849, the party of
Order had a deputy named Rateau move that the Assembly should let the
organic laws go and rather decide on its own dissolution. Not only the
ministry, with Odilon Barrot at its head, but all the royalist members
of the National Assembly told it in bullying accents then that its
dissolution was necessary for the restoration of credit, for the
consolidation of order, for putting an end to the indefinite
provisional arrangements and establishing a definitive state of
affairs; that it hampered the productivity of the new government and
sought to prolong its existence merely out of malice; that the country
was tired of it. Bonaparte took note of all this invective against the
legislative power, learned it by heart, and proved to the
parliamentary royalists, on December 2, 1851, that he had learned from
them. He repeated their own catchwords against them.

The Barrot Ministry and the part of Order went further. They caused
petitions to the National Assembly to be made throughout France, in
which this body was politely requested to decamp. They thus led the
unorganized popular masses into the fire of battle against the
National Assembly, the constitutionally organized expression of the
people. They taught Bonaparte to appeal against the parliamentary
assemblies to the people. At length, on January 29, 1849, the day had
come on which the Constituent Assembly was to decide concerning its
own dissolution. The National Assembly found the building where its
sessions were held occupied by the military; Changarnier, the general
of the party of Order, in whose hands the supreme command of the
National Guard and troops of the line had been united, held a great
military review in Paris, as if a battle were impending, and the
royalists in coalition threateningly declared to the Constituent
Assembly that force would be employed if it should prove unwilling. It
was willing, and only bargained for a very short extra term of
life. What was January 29 but the coup d'etat of December 2, 1851,
only carried out by the royalists with Bonaparte against the
republican National Assembly? The gentlemen did not observe, or did
not wish to observe, that Bonaparte availed himself of January 29,
1849, to have a portion of the troops march past him in front of the
Tuileries. and seized with avidity on just this first public summoning
of the military power against the parliamentary power to foreshadow
Caligula. They, to be sure, saw only their Changarnier.

A motive that particularly actuated the party of Order in forcibly
cutting short the duration of the Constituent Assembly's life was the
organic laws supplementing the constitution, such as the law on
education, the law on religious worship, etc. To the royalists in
coalition it was most important that they themselves should make these
laws and not let them be made by the republicans, who had grown
mistrustful. Among these organic laws, however, was also a law on the
responsibility of the President of the Republic. In 1851 the
Legislative Assembly was occupied with the drafting of just such a
law, when Bonaparte anticipated this coup with the coup of December
2. What would the royalists in coalition not have given in their
winter election campaign of 1851 to have found the Responsibility Law
ready to hand, and drawn up, at that, by a mistrustful, hostile,
republican Assembly!

After the Constituent Assembly had itself shattered its last weapon on
January 29, 1849, the Barrot Ministry and the friends of order hounded
it to death, left nothing undone that could humiliate it, and wrested
from the impotent, self-despairing Assembly laws that cost it the last
remnant of respect in the eyes of the public. Bonaparte, occupied with
his fixed Napoleonic idea, was brazen enough to exploit publicly this
degradation of the parliamentary power. For when on May 8, 1849, the
National Assembly passed a vote of censure of the ministry because of
the occupation of Civitavecchia by Oudinot, and ordered it to bring
back the Roman expedition to its alleged purpose, Bonaparte published
the same evening in the Moniteur a letter to Oudinot in which he
congratulated him on his heroic exploits and, in contrast to the
ink-slinging parliamentarians, already posed as the generous protector
of the army. The royalists smiled at this. They regarded him simply as
their dupe. Finally, when Marrast, the President of the Constituent
Assembly, believed for a moment that the safety of the National
Assembly was endangered and, relying on the constitution,
requisitioned a colonel and his regiment, the colonel declined, cited
discipline in his support, and referred Marrast to Changarnier, who
scornfully refused him with the remark that he did not like
baionnettes intelligentes [intellectual bayonets]. In November, 1851,
when the royalists in coalition wanted to begin the decisive struggle
with Bonaparte, they sought to put through in their notorious
Quaestors' Bill the principle of the direct requisition of troops by
the President of the National Assembly. One of their generals, Le Flo,
had signed the bill. In vain did Changarnier vote for it and Thiers
pay homage to the farsighted wisdom of the former Constituent
Assembly. The War Minister, Saint-Arnaud, answered him as Changarnier
had answered Marrast -- and to the acclamation of the Montagne!

Thus the party of Order, when it was not yet the National Assembly,
when it was still only the ministry, had itself stigmatized the
parliamentary regime. And it makes an outcry when December 2, 1851,
banishes this regime from France!

We wish it a happy journey.

III

On May 28, 1849, the Legislative National Assembly met. On December 2,
1851, it was dispersed. This period covers the span of life of the
constitutional, or parliamentary, republic.

In the first French Revolution the rule of the Constitutionalists is
followed by the rule of the Girondists and the rule of the Girondists
by the rule of the Jacobins. Each of these parties relies on the more
progressive party for support. As soon as it has brought the
revolution far enough to be unable to follow it further, still less to
go ahead of it, it is thrust aside by the holder ally that stands
behind it and sent to the guillotine. The revolution thus moves along
an ascending line.

It is the reverse with the Revolution of 1848. The proletarian party
appears as an appendage of the petty-bourgeois-democratic party. It is
betrayed and dropped by the latter on April 16, May 15, and in the
June days. The democratic part, in its turn, leans on the shoulders of
the bourgeois-republican party. The bourgeois republicans no sooner
believe themselves well established than they shake off the
troublesome comrade and support themselves on the shoulders of the
party of Order. The party of Order hunches its shoulders, lets the
bourgeois republicans tumble, and throws itself on the shoulders of
armed force. It fancies it is still sitting on those shoulders when
one fine morning it perceives that the shoulders have transformed
themselves into bayonets. Each party kicks from behind at the one
driving forward, and leans over in front toward the party which
presses backward. No wonder that in this ridiculous posture it loses
its balance and, having made the inevitable grimaces, collapses with
curious gyrations. The revolution thus moves in a descending line. It
finds itself in this state of retrogressive motion before the last
February barricade has been cleared away and the first revolutionary
authority constituted.

The period that we have before us comprises the most motley mixture of
crying contradictions: constitutionalists who conspire openly against
the constitution; revolutionists who are confessedly constitutional; a
National Assembly that wants to be omnipotent and always remains
parliamentary; a Montagne that finds its vocation in patience and
counters its present defeats by prophesying future victories;
royalists who form the patres conscripti [elders] of the republic and
are forced by the situation to keep the hostile royal houses they
adhere to abroad, and the republic, which they hate, in France; an
executive power that finds its strength in its very weakness and its
respectability in the contempt that it calls forth; a republic that is
nothing but the combined infamy of two monarchies, the Restoration and
the July Monarchy, with an imperial label -- alliances whose first
proviso is separation; struggles whose first law is indecision; wild,
inane agitation in the name of tranquillity, most solemn preaching of
tranquillity in the name of revolution- passions without truth, truths
without passion; heroes without heroic deeds, history without events;
development, whose sole driving force seems to be the calendar,
wearying with constant repetition of the same tensions and
relaxations; antagonisms that periodically seem to work themselves up
to a climax only to lose their sharpness and fall away without being
able to resolve themselves; pretentiously paraded exertions and
philistine terror at the danger of the world's coming to an end, and
at the same time the pettiest intrigues and court comedies played by
the world redeemers, who in their laisser aller [letting things take
their course] remind us less of the Day of Judgment than of the times
of the Fronde [An anti-royalist movement of 1648-53. -- Ed.] -- the
official collective genius of France brought to naught by the artful
stupidity of a single individual; the collective will of the nation,
as often as it speaks through universal suffrage, seeking its
appropriate expression through the inveterate enemies of the interests
of the masses, until at length it finds it in the self-will of a
filibuster. If any section of history has been painted gray on gray,
it is this. Men and events appear as reverse Schlemihls, as shadows
that have lost their bodies. The revolution itself paralyzes its own
bearers and endows only its adversaries with passionate
forcefulness. When the "red specter," continually conjured up and
exercised by the counterrevolutionaries finally appears, it appears
not with the Phrygian cap of anarchy on its head, but in the uniform
of order, in red breeches.

We have seen that the ministry which Bonaparte installed on December
20, 1848, on his Ascension Day, was a ministry of the party of Order,
of the Legitimist and Orleanist coalition. This Barrot-Falloux
Ministry had outlived the republican Constituent Assembly, whose term
of life it had more or less violently cut short, and found itself
still at the helm. Changarnier, the general of the allied royalists,
continued to unite in his person the general command of the First Army
Division and of the National Guard of Paris. Finally, the general
elections had secured the party of Order a large majority in the
National Assembly. Here the deputies and peers of Louis Philippe
encountered a hallowed host of Legitimists, for whom many of the
nation's ballots had become transformed into admission cards to the
political stage. The Bonapartist representatives of the people were
too sparse to be able to form an independent parliamentary party. They
appeared merely as the mauvaise queue [evil appendage] of the party of
Order. Thus the party of Order was in possession of the governmental
power, the army and the legislative body, in short, of the whole of
the state power; it had been morally strengthened by the general
elections, which made its rule appear as the will of the people, and
by the simultaneous triumph of the counterrevolution on the whole
continent of Europe.

Never did a party open its campaign with greater resources or under
more favorable auspices.

The shipwrecked pure republicans found that they had melted down to a
clique of about fifty men in the Legislative National Assembly, the
African generals Cavaignac, Lamoriciere, and Bedeau at their head. The
great opposition party, however, was formed by the Montagne. The
social-democratic party had given itself this parliamentary baptismal
name. It commanded more than two hundred of the seven hundred and
fifty votes of the National Assembly and was consequently at least as
powerful as any one of the three factions of the party of Order taken
by itself. Its numerical inferiority compared with the entire royalist
coalition seemed compensated by special circumstances. Not only did
the elections in the departments show that it had gained a
considerable following among the rural population. It counted in its
ranks almost all the deputies from Paris; the army had made a
confession of democratic faith by the election of three
noncommissioned officers; and the leader of the Montagne,
Ledru-Rollin, in contradistinction to all the representatives of the
party of Order, had been raised to the parliamentary peerage by five
departments, which had pooled their votes for him. In view of the
inevitable clashes of the royalists among themselves and of the whole
party of Order with Bonaparte, the Montagne thus seemed to have all
the elements of success before it on May 28, 1849. A fortnight later
it had lost everything, honor included.

Before we pursue parliamentary history further, some remarks are
necessary to avoid common misconceptions regarding the whole character
of the epoch that lies before us. Looked at with the eyes of
democrats, the period of the Legislative National Assembly is
concerned with what the period of the Constituent Assembly was
concerned with: the simple struggle between republicans and
royalists. The movement itself, however, they sum up in the one
shibboleth: "reaction" -- night, in which all cats are gray and which
permits them to reel off their night watchman's commonplaces. And to
be sure, at first sight the party of Order reveals a maze of different
royalist factions which not only intrigue against each other -- each
seeking to elevate its own pretender to the throne and exclude the
pretender of the opposing faction -- but also all unite in common
hatred of, and common onslaughts on, the "republic." In opposition to
this royalist conspiracy the Montagne, for its part, appears as the
representative of the "republic." The party of Order appears to be
perpetually engaged in a "reaction," directed against press,
association, and the like, neither more nor less than in Prussia, and,
as in Prussia, carried out in the form of brutal police intervention
by the bureaucracy, the gendarmerie, and the law courts. The Montagne,
for its part, is just as continually occupied in warding off these
attacks and thus defending the "eternal rights of man" as every
so-called people's party has done, more or less, for a century and a
half. If one looks at the situation and the parties more closely,
however, this superficial appearance, which veils the class struggle
and the peculiar physiognomy of this period, disappears.

Legitimists and Orleanists, as we have said, formed the two great
factions of the party of Order. Was what held these factions fast to
their pretenders and kept them apart from each other nothing but
fleur-de-lis and tricolor, House of Bourbon and House of Orleans,
different shades of royalism -- was it at all the confession of faith
of royalism? Under the Bourbons, big landed property had governed,
with its priests and lackeys; under Orleans, high finance, large-scale
industry, large-scale trade, that is, capital, with its retinue of
lawyers, professors, and smooth-tongued orators. The Legitimate
Monarchy was merely the political expression of the hereditary rule of
the lords of the soil, as the July Monarchy was only the political
expression of the usurped rule of the bourgeois parvenus. What kept
the two factions apart, therefore, was not any so-called principles,
it was their material conditions of existence, two different kinds of
property; it was the old contrast between town and country, the
rivalry between capital and landed property. That at the same time old
memories, personal enmities, fears and hopes, prejudices and
illusions, sympathies and antipathies, convictions, articles of faith
and principles bound them to one or the other royal house, who denies
this? Upon the different forms of property, upon the social conditions
of existence, rises an entire superstructure of distinct and
peculiarly formed sentiments, illusions, modes of thought, and views
of life. The entire class creates and forms them out of its material
foundations and out of the corresponding social relations. The single
individual, who derives them through tradition and upbringing, may
imagine that they form the real motives and the starting point of his
activity. While each faction, Orleanists and Legitimists, sought to
make itself and the other believe that it was loyalty to the two royal
houses which separated them, facts later proved that it was rather
their divided interests which forbade the uniting of the two royal
houses. And as in private life one differentiates between what a man
thinks and says of himself and what he really is and does, so in
historical struggles one must distinguish still more the phrases and
fancies of parties from their real organism and their real interests,
their conception of themselves from their reality. Orleanists and
Legitimists found themselves side by side in the republic, with equal
claims. If each side wished to effect the restoration of its own royal
house against the other, that merely signified that each of the two
great interests into which the bourgeoisie is split -- landed property
and capital -- sought to restore its own supremacy and the
subordination of the other. We speak of two interests of the
bourgeoisie, for large landed property, despite its feudal coquetry
and pride of race, has been rendered thoroughly bourgeois by the
development of modern society. Thus the Tories in England long
imagined that they were enthusiastic about monarchy, the church, and
the beauties of the old English Constitution, until the day of danger
wrung from them the confession that they are enthusiastic only about
ground rent.

The royalists in coalition carried on their intrigues against one
another in the press, in Ems, in Claremont, outside parliament. Behind
the scenes they donned their old Orleanist and Legitimist liveries
again and once more engaged in their old tourneys. But on the public
stage, in their grand performances of state as a great parliamentary
party, they put off their respective royal houses with mere obeisances
and adjourn the restoration of the monarchy in infinitum. They do
their real business as the party of Order, that is, under a social,
not under a political title; as representatives of the bourgeois world
order, not as knights of errant princesses; as the bourgeois class
against other classes, not as royalists against the republicans. And
as the party of Order they exercised more unrestricted and sterner
domination over the other classes of society than ever previously
under the Restoration or under the July Monarchy, a domination which,
in general, was possible only under the form of the parliamentary
republic, for only under this form could the two great divisions of
the French bourgeoisie unite, and thus put the rule of their class
instead of the regime of a privileged faction of it on the order of
the day. If they nevertheless, as the party of Order, also insulted
the republic and expressed their repugnance to it, this happened not
merely from royalist memories. Instinct taught them that the republic,
true enough, makes their political rule complete, but at the same time
undermines its social foundation, since they must now confront the
subjugated classes and contend against them without mediation, without
the concealment afforded by the crown, without being able to divert
the national interest by their subordinate struggles among themselves
and with the monarchy. It was a feeling of weakness that caused them
to recoil from the pure conditions of their own class rule and to
yearn for the former more incomplete, more undeveloped, and precisely
on that account less dangerous forms of this rule. On the other hand,
every time the royalists in coalition come in conflict with the
pretender who confronts them, with Bonaparte, every time they believe
their parliamentary omnipotence endangered by the executive power --
every time, therefore, that they must produce their political title to
their rule -- they come forward as republicans and not as royalists,
from the Orleanist Thiers, who warns the National Assembly that the
republic divides them least, to the Legitimist Berryer, who on
December 2, 1851, as a tribune swathed in a tricolored sash, harangues
the people assembled before the town hall of the Tenth Arrondissement
in the name of the republic. To be sure, a mocking echo calls back to
him: Henry V! Henry V!

As against the coalesced bourgeoisie, a coalition between petty
bourgeois and workers had been formed, the so- called
Social-Democratic party. The petty bourgeois saw that they were badly
rewarded after the June days of 1848, that their material interests
were imperiled, and that the democratic guarantees which were to
insure the effectuation of these interests were called in question by
the counterrevolution. Accordingly they came closer to the workers. On
the other hand, their parliamentary representation, the Montagne,
thrust aside during the dictatorship of the bourgeois republicans, had
in the last half of the life of the Constituent Assembly reconquered
its lost popularity through the struggle with Bonaparte and the
royalist ministers. It had concluded an alliance with the socialist
leaders. In February, 1849, banquets celebrated the reconciliation. A
joint program was drafted, joint election committees were set up and
joint candidates put forward. The revolutionary point was broken off
and a democratic turn given to the social demands of the proletariat;
the purely political form was stripped off the democratic claims of
the petty bourgeoisie and their socialist point thrust forward. Thus
arose social-democracy. The new Montagne, the result of this
combination, contained, apart from some supernumeraries from the
working class and some socialist sectarians, the same elements as the
old Montagne, but numerically stronger. However, in the course of
development it had changed with the class that it represented. The
peculiar character of social-democracy is epitomized in the fact that
democratic-republican institutions are demanded as a means, not of
doing away with two extremes, capital and wage labor, but of weakening
their antagonism and transforming it into harmony. However different
the means proposed for the attainment of this end may be, however much
it may be trimmed with more or less revolutionary notions, the content
remains the same. This content is the transformation of society in a
democratic way, but a transformation within the bounds of the petty
bourgeoisie. Only one must not get the narrow- minded notion that the
petty bourgeoisie, on principle, wishes to enforce an egoistic class
interest. Rather, it believes that the special conditions of its
emancipation are the general conditions within whose frame alone
modern society can be saved and the class struggle avoided. just as
little must one imagine that the democratic representatives are indeed
all shopkeepers or enthusiastic champions of shopkeepers. According to
their education and their individual position they may be as far apart
as heaven and earth. What makes them representatives of the petty
bourgeoisie is the fact that in their minds they do not get beyond the
limits which the latter do not get beyond in life, that they are
consequently driven, theoretically, to the same problems and solutions
to which material interest and social position drive the latter
practically. This is, in general, the relationship between the
political and literary representatives of a class and the class they
represent.

After this analysis it is obvious that if the Montagne continually
contends with the party of Order for the republic and the so-called
rights of man, neither the republic nor the rights of man are its
final end, any more than an army which one wants to deprive of its
weapons and which resists has taken the field in order to remain in
possession of its own weapons.

Immediately, as soon as the National Assembly met, the party of Order
provoked the Montagne. The bourgeoisie now felt the necessity of
making an end of the democratic petty bourgeois, just as a year before
it had realized the necessity of settling with the revolutionary
proletariat. But the situation of the adversary was different. The
strength of the proletarian party lay in the streets, that of the
petty bourgeois in the National Assembly itself. It was therefore a
question of decoying them out of the National Assembly into the
streets and causing them to smash their parliamentary power
themselves, before time and circumstances could consolidate it. The
Montagne rushed headlong into the trap.

The bombardment of Rome by the French troops was the bait that was
thrown. It violated Article 5 of the constitution, which forbids the
French Republic to employ its military forces against the freedom of
another people. In addition to this, Article 54 prohibited any
declaration of war by the executive power without the assent of the
National Assembly, and by its resolution of May 8 the Constituent
Assembly had disapproved of the Roman expedition. On these grounds
Ledru-Rollin brought in a bill of impeachment against Bonaparte and
his ministers on June 11, 1849- Exasperated by the wasp stings of
Thiers, he actually let himself be carried away to the point of
threatening that he would defend the constitution by every means, even
with arms in hand. The Montagne rose to a man and repeated this call
to arms. On June 12 the National Assembly rejected the bill of
impeachment, and the Montagne left the parliament. The events of June
13 are known: the proclamation issued by a section of the Montagne
declaring Bonaparte and his ministers "outside the constitution"; the
street procession of the democratic National Guard, who, unarmed as
they were, dispersed on encountering the troops of Changarnier, etc.,
etc. A part of the Montagne fled abroad; another part was arraigned
before the High Court at Bourges; and a parliamentary regulation
subjected the remainder to the schoolmasterly surveillance of the
President of the National Assembly. Paris was again declared in a
state of siege and the democratic part of its National Guard
dissolved. Thus the influence of the Montagne in parliament and the
power of the petty bourgeois in Paris were broken.

Lyon, where June 13 had given the signal for a bloody insurrection of
the workers, was, along with the five surrounding departments,
likewise declared in a state of siege, a condition that has continued
up to the present moment.

The bulk of the Montagne had left its vanguard in the lurch, having
refused to subscribe to its proclamation. The press had deserted, only
two journals having dared to publish the pronunciamento. The petty
bourgeois betrayed their representatives in that the National Guard
either stayed away or, where they appeared, hindered the building of
barricades. The representatives had duped the petty bourgeois in that
the alleged allies from the army were nowhere to be seen. Finally,
instead of gaining an accession of strength from it, the democratic
party had infected the proletariat with its own weakness and, as usual
with the great deeds of democrats, the leaders had the satisfaction of
being able to charge their "people" with desertion, and the people the
satisfaction of being able to charge its leaders with humbugging it.

Seldom had an action been announced with more noise than the impending
campaign of the Montagne, seldom had an event been trumpeted with
greater certainty or longer in advance than the inevitable victory of
the democracy. Most assuredly the democrats believe in the trumpets
before whose blasts the walls of Jericho fell down. And as often as
they stand before the ramparts of despotism, they seek to imitate the
miracle. If the Montagne wished to triumph in parliament it should not
have called to arms. If it called to arms in parliament it should not
have acted in parliamentary fashion in the streets. If the peaceful
demonstration was meant seriously, then it was folly not to foresee
that it would be given a warlike reception. If a real struggle was
intended, then it was a queer idea to lay down the weapons with which
it would have to be waged. But the revolutionary threats of the petty
bourgeois and their democratic representatives are mere attempts to
intimidate the antagonist. And when they have run into a blind alley,
when they have sufficiently compromised themselves to make it
necessary to activate their threats, then this is done in an ambiguous
fashion that avoids nothing so much as the means to the end and tries
to find excuses for succumbing. The blaring overture that announced
the contest dies away in a pusillanimous snarl as soon as the struggle
has to begin, the actors cease to take themselves au sorieux, and the
action collapses completely, like a pricked bubble.

No party exaggerates its means more than the democratic, none deludes
itself more light-mindedly over the situation. Since a section of the
army had voted for it, the Montagne was now convinced that the army
would revolt for it. And on what occasion? On an occasion which, from
the standpoint of the troops, had no other meaning than that the
revolutionists took the side of the Roman soldiers against the French
soldiers. On the other hand, the recollections of June, 1848, were
still too fresh to allow of anything but a profound aversion on the
part of the proletariat toward the National Guard and a thoroughgoing
mistrust of the democratic chiefs on the part of the chiefs of the
secret societies. To iron out these differences, it was necessary for
great common interests to be at stake. The violation of an abstract
paragraph of the constitution could not provide these interests. Had
not the constitution been repeatedly violated, according to the
assurance of the democrats themselves? Had not the most popular
journals branded it as counterrevolutionary botchwork? But the
democrat, because he represents the petty bourgeoisie -- that is, a
transition class, in which the interests of two classes are
simultaneously mutually blunted -- imagines himself elevated above
class antagonism generally. The democrats concede that a privileged
class confronts them, but they, along with all the rest of the nation,
form the people. What they represent is the people's rights; what
interests them is the people's interests. Accordingly, when a struggle
is impending they do not need to examine the interests and positions
of the different classes. They do not need to weigh their own
resources too critically. They have merely to give the signal and the
people, with all its inexhaustible resources, will fall upon the
oppressors. Now if in the performance their interests prove to be
uninteresting and their potency impotence, then either the fault lies
with pernicious sophists, who split the indivisible people into
different hostile camps, or the army was too brutalized and blinded to
comprehend that the pure aims of democracy are the best thing for it,
or the whole thing has been wrecked by a detail in its execution, or
else an unforeseen accident has this time spoiled the game. In any
case, the democrat comes out of the most disgraceful defeat just @s
immaculate as he was innocent when he went into it, with the newly won
conviction that he is bound to win, not that he himself and his party
have to give up the old standpoint, but, on the contrary, that
conditions have to ripen to suit him.

Therefore one must not imagine the Montagne, decimated and broken
though it was, and humiliated by the new parliamentary regulation, as
being particularly miserable. If June I3 had removed its chiefs, it
made room, on the other hand, for men of lesser caliber, whom this new
position flattered. If their impotence in parliament could no longer
be doubted, they were entitled now to confine their actions to
outbursts of moral indignation and blustering declamation. If the
party of Order affected to see embodied in them, as the last official
representatives of the revolution, all the terrors of anarchy, they
could in reality be all the more insipid and modest. They consoled
themselves, however, for June 13 with the profound utterance: but if
they dare to attack universal suffrage, well then -- then we'll show
them what we are made of! Nous verrons! [We shall see!]

So far as the Montagnards who fled abroad are concerned, it is
sufficient to remark here that Ledru- Rollin, because in barely a
fortnight he had succeeded in ruining irretrievably the powerful party
at whose head he stood, now found himself called upon to form a French
government in partibus; that to the extent that the level of the
revolution sank and the official bigwigs of official France became
more dwarf-like, his figure in the distance, removed from the scene of
action, seemed to grow in stature; that he could figure as the
republican pretender for 1852, and that he issued periodical circulars
to the Wallachians and other peoples in which the despots of the
Continent were threatened with the deeds of himself and his
confederates. Was Proudhon altogether wrong when he cried to these
gentlemen: "Vous n'etes que des blagueurs" ["you are nothing but
windbags"]?

On June 13 the party of Order had not only broken the Montagne, it had
effected the subordination of the constitution to the majority
decisions of the National Assembly. And it understood the republic
thus: that the bourgeoisie rules here in parliamentary forms, without,
as in a monarchy, encountering any barrier such as the veto power of
the executive or the right to dissolve parliament. This was a
parliamentary republic, as Thiers termed it. But whereas on June 13
the bourgeoisie secured its omnipotence within the house of
parliament, did it not afflict parliament itself, as against the
executive authority and the people, with incurable weakness by
expelling its most popular part? By surrendering numerous deputies
without further ado on the demand of the courts, it abolished its own
parliamentary immunity. The humiliating regulations to which it
subjected the Montagne exalted the President of the Republic in the
same measure as it degraded the individual representatives of the
people. By branding an insurrection for the protection of the
constitutional charter an anarchic act aiming at the subversion of
society, it precluded the possibility of its appealing to insurrection
should the executive authority violate the constitution in relation to
it. And by the irony of history, the general who on Bonaparte's
instructions bombarded Rome and thus provided the immediate occasion
for the constitutional revolt of June 13, that very Oudinot had to be
the man offered by the party of Order imploringly and unfailingly to
the people as general on behalf of the constitution against Bonaparte
on December 2, 1851. Another hero of June 13, Vieyra, who was lauded
from the tribune of the National Assembly for the brutalities he
committed in the democratic newspaper offices at the head of a gang of
National Guards belonging to high finance circles -- this same Vieyra
had been initiated into Bonaparte's conspiracy and he contributed
substantially to depriving the National Assembly in the hour of its
death of any protection by the National Guard.

June 13 had still another meaning. The Montagne had wanted to force
the impeachment of Bonaparte. Its defeat was therefore a direct
victory for Bonaparte, his personal triumph over his democratic
enemies. The party of Order gained the victory; Bonaparte had only to
cash in on it. He did so. On June 14 a proclamation could be read on
the walls of Paris in which the President, reluctantly, against his
will, compelled as it were by the sheer force of events, comes forth
from his cloistered seclusion and, posing as misunderstood virtue,
complains of the calumnies of his opponents and, while he seems to
identify his person with the cause of order, rather identifies the
cause of order with his person. Moreover, the National Assembly had,
it is true, subsequently approved the expedition against Rome, but
Bonaparte had taken the initiative in the matter. After having
reinstalled the High Priest Samuel in the Vatican, he could hope to
enter the Tuileries as King David. He had won the priests over to his
side.

The revolt of June 13 was confined, as we have seen, to a peaceful
street procession. No war laurels were therefore to be won against
it. Nevertheless, at a time as poor as this in heroes and events, the
party of Order transformed this bloodless battle into a second
Austerlitz. Platform and press praised the army as the power of order,
in contrast to the popular masses representing the impotence of
anarchy, and extolled Changarnier as the "bulwark of society," a
deception in which he himself finally came to
believe. Surreptitiously, however, the corps that seemed doubtful were
transferred from Paris, the regiments which had shown the most
democratic sentiments in the elections were banished from France to
Algiers; the turbulent spirits among the troops were relegated to
penal detachments; and finally the isolation of the press from the
barracks and of the barracks from bourgeois society was systematically
carried out.

Here we have reached the decisive turning point in the history of the
French National Guard. In 1830 it was decisive in the overthrow of the
Restoration. Under Louis Philippe every rebellion miscarried in which
the National Guard stood on the side of the troops. When in the
February days of 1848 it evinced a passive attitude toward the
insurrection and an equivocal one toward Louis Philippe, he gave
himself up for lost and actually was lost. Thus the conviction took
root that the revolution could not be victorious without the National
Guard, nor the army against it. This was the superstition of the army
in regard to civilian omnipotence. The June days of 1848, when the
entire National Guard, with the troops of the line, put down the
insurrection, had strengthened the superstition. After Bonaparte's
assumption of office, the position of the National Guard was to some
extent weakened by the unconstitutional union, in the person of
Changarnier, of the command of its forces with the command of the
First Army Division.

Just as the command of the National Guard appeared here as an
attribute of the military commander in chief, so the National Guard
itself appeared as only an appendage of the troops of the
line. Finally, on June 13 its power was broken, and not only by its
partial disbandment, which from this time on was periodically repeated
all over France, until mere fragments of it were left behind. The
demonstration of June 13 was, above all, a demonstration of the
democratic National Guards. They had not, to be sure, borne their
arms, but had worn their uniforms against the army; precisely in this
uniform, however, lay the talisman. The army convinced itself that
this uniform was a piece of woolen cloth like any other. The spell was
broken. In the June days of 1848, bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie
had united as the National Guard with the army against the
proletariat; on June 13, 1849, the bourgeoisie let the petty-bourgeois
National Guard be dispersed by the army; on December 2, 1851, the
National Guard of the bourgeoisie itself had vanished, and Bonaparte
merely registered this fact when he subsequently signed the decree for
its disbandment, Thus the bourgeoisie had itself smashed its last
weapon against the army; the moment the petty bourgeoisie no longer
stood behind it as a vassal, but before it as a rebel, it had to smash
it as in general it was bound to destroy all its means of defense
against absolutism with its own hand as soon as it had itself become
absolute.

Meanwhile, the party of Order celebrated the reconquest of a power
that seemed lost in I 848 only to be found again, freed from its
restraints, in 1849, celebrated by means of invectives against the
republic and the constitution, of curses on all future, present, and
past revolutions, including that which its own leaders had made, and
in laws by which the press was muzzled, association destroyed, and the
state of siege regulated as an organic institution. The National
Assembly then adjourned from the middle of August to the middle of
October, after having appointed a permanent commission for the period
of its absence. During this recess the Legitimists intrigued with Ems,
the Orleanists with Claremont, Bonaparte by means of princely tours,
and the Departmental Councils in deliberations on a revision of the
constitution: incidents which regularly recur in the periodic recesses
of the National Assembly and which I propose to discuss only when they
become events. Here it may merely be remarked, in addition, that it
was impolitic for the National Assembly to disappear from the stage
for considerable intervals and leave only a single, albeit a sorry,
figure to be seen at the head of the republic, that of Louis
Bonaparte, while to the scandal of the public the party of Order fell
asunder into its royalist component parts and followed its conflicting
desires for restoration. As often as the confused noise of parliament
grew silent during these recesses and its body dissolved into the
nation, it became unmistakably clear that only one thing was still
lacking to complete the true form of this republic: to make the
former's recess permanent and replace the latter's inscription,
Liberte, Egilite, Fraternite, with the unambiguous words: infantry,
cavalry, artillery!

IV

In the middle of October, 1849, the National Assembly met once
more. On November 1 Bonaparte surprised it with a message in which he
announced the dismissal of the Barrot-Falloux Ministry and the
formation of a new ministry. No one has ever sacked lackeys with less
ceremony than Bonaparte his ministers. The kicks that were intended
for the National Assembly were given in the meantime to Barrot & Co.

The Barrot Ministry, as we have seen, had been composed of Legitimists
and Orleanists; it was a ministry of the party of Order. Bonaparte had
needed it to dissolve the republican Constituent Assembly, to bring
about the expedition against Rome, and to break the Democratic
party. Behind this ministry he had seemingly effaced himself,
surrendered governmental power into the hands of the party of Order,
and donned the modest character mask that the responsible editor of a
newspaper wore under Louis Philippe, the mask of the bonnne de paille
[straw man]. He now threw off a mask which was no longer the light
veil behind which he could hide his physiognomy, but an iron mask
which prevented him from displaying a physiognomy of his own. He had
appointed the Barrot Ministry in order to blast the republican
National Assembly in the name of the party of Order; he dismissed it
in order to declare his own name independent of the National Assembly
of the party of Order.

Plausible pretexts for this dismissal were not lacking. The Barrot
Ministry neglected even the decencies that would have let the
President of the Republic appear as a power side by side with the
National Assembly. During the recess of the National Assembly
Bonaparte published a letter to Edgar Ney in which he seemed to
disapprove of the illiberal attitude of the Pope, just as in
opposition to the Constituent Assembly he had published a letter in
which he commended Oudinot for the attack on the Roman republic. When
the National Assembly now voted the budget for the Roman expedition,
Victor Hugo, out of alleged liberalism, brought up this letter for
discussion. The party of Order with scornfully incredulous outcries
stifled the idea that Bonaparte's ideas could have any political
importance. Not one of the ministers took up the gauntlet for him. On
another occasion Barrot, with his well-known hollow rhetoric, let fall
from the platform words of indignation concerning the "abominable
intrigues" that, according to his assertion, went on in the immediate
entourage of the President. Finally, while the ministry obtained from
the National Assembly a widow's pension for the Duchess of Orleans it
rejected any proposal to increase the Civil List of the President. And
in Bonaparte the imperial pretender was so intimately bound up with
the adventurer down on his luck that the one great idea, that he was
called to restore the empire, was always supplemented by the other,
that it was the mission of the French people to pay his debts.

The Barrot-Falloux Ministry was the first and last parliamentary
ministry that Bonaparte brought into being. Its dismissal forms,
accordingly, a decisive turning point. With it the party of Order
lost, never to reconquer it, an indispensable position for the
maintenance of the parliamentary regime, the lever of executive
power. It is immediately obvious that in a country like France, where
the executive power commands an army of officials numbering more than
half a million individuals and therefore constantly maintains an
immense mass of interests and livelihoods in the most absolute
dependence; where the state enmeshes, controls, regulates,
superintends, and tutors civil society from its most comprehensive
manifestations of life down to its most insignificant stirrings, from
its most general modes of being to the private existence of
individuals; where through the most extraordinary centralization this
parasitic body acquires a ubiquity, an omniscience, a capacity for
accelerated mobility, and an elasticity which finds a counterpart only
in the helpless dependence, the loose shapelessness of the actual body
politic -- it is obvious that in such a country the National Assembly
forfeits all real influence when it loses command of the ministerial
posts, if it does not at the same time simplify the administration of
the state, reduce the army of officials as far as possible, and,
finally, let civil society and public opinion create organs of their
own, independent of the governmental power. But it is precisely with
the maintenance of that extensive state machine in its numerous
ramifications that the material interests of the French bourgeoisie
are interwoven in the closest fashion. Here it finds posts for its
surplus population and makes up in the form of state salaries for what
it cannot pocket in the form of profit, interest, rents, and
honorariums. On the other hand, its political interests compelled it
to increase daily the repressive measures and therefore the resources
and the personnel of the state power, while at the same time it had to
wage an uninterrupted war against public opinion and mistrustfully
mutilate, cripple, the independent organs of the social movement,
where it did not succeed in amputating them entirely. Thus the French
bourgeoisie was compelled by its class position to annihilate, on the
one hand, the vital conditions of all parliamentary power, and
therefore, likewise, of its own, and to render irresistible, on the
other hand, the executive power hostile to it.

The new ministry was called the Hautpoul Ministry. Not in the sense
that General Hautpoul had received the rank of Prime Minister. Rather,
simultaneously with Barrot's dismissal, Bonaparte abolished this
dignity, which, true enough, condemned the President of the Republic
to the status of the legal nonentity of a constitutional monarch, but
of a constitutional monarch without throne or crown, without scepter
or sword, without freedom from responsibility, without imprescriptible
possession of the highest state dignity, and worst of all, without a
Civil List. The Hautpoul Ministry contained only one man of
parliamentary standing, the moneylender Fould, one of the most
notorious of the high financiers. To his lot fell the Ministry of
Finance. Look up the quotations on the Paris Bourse and you will find
that from November 1, 1849, onward the French fonds [government
securities] rise and fall with the rise and fall of Bonapartist
stocks. While Bonaparte had thus found his ally in the Bourse, he at
the same time took possession of the police by appointing Carlier
police prefect of Paris.

Only in the course of development, however, could the consequences of
the change of ministers come to light. To begin with, Bonaparte had
taken a step forward only to be driven backward all the more
conspicuously. His brusque message was followed by the most servile
declaration of allegiance to the National Assembly. As often as the
ministers dared to make a diffident attempt to introduce his personal
fads as legislative proposals, they themselves seemed to carry out,
against their will and compelled by their position, comical
commissions whose fruitlessness they were persuaded of in advance. As
often as Bonaparte blurted out his intentions behind the ministers'
backs and played with his "idees napoleoniennes," his own ministers
disavowed him from the tribune of the National Assembly. His
usurpatory longings seemed to make themselves heard only in order that
the malicious laughter of his opponents might not be muted. He behaved
like an unrecognized genius, whom all the world takes for a
simpleton. Never did he enjoy the contempt of all classes in fuller
measure than during this period. Never did the bourgeoisie rule more
absolutely, never did it display more ostentatiously the insignia of
domination.

I need not write here the history of its legislative activity, which
is summarized during this period in two laws: in the law
reestablishing the wine tax and the education law abolishing
unbelief. If wine drinking was made harder for the French, they were
presented all the more plentifully with the water of true life. If in
the law on the wine tax the bourgeoisie declared the old, hateful
French tax system to be inviolable, it sought through the education
law to insure among the masses the old state of mind that put up with
the tax system. One is astonished to see the Orleanists, the liberal
bourgeois, these old apostles of Voltaireanism and eclectic
philosophy, entrust to their hereditary enemies, the Jesuits, the
superintendence of the French mind. However Orleanists and Legitimists
could part company in regard to the pretenders to the throne, they
understood that securing their united rule necessitated the uniting of
the means of repression of two epochs, that the means of subjugation
of the July Monarchy had to be supplemented and strengthened by the
means of subjugation of the Restoration.

The peasants, disappointed in all their hopes, crushed more than ever
by the low level of grain prices on the one hand, and by the growing
burden of taxes and mortgage debts on the other, began to bestir
themselves in the departments. They were answered by a drive against
the schoolmasters, who were made subject to the clergy, by a drive
against the mayors, made subject to the prefects, and by a system of
espionage to which all were made subject. In Paris and the large towns
reaction itself has the physiognomy of its epoch and challenges more
than it strikes down. In the countryside it becomes dull, coarse,
petty, tiresome, and vexatious, in a word, the gendarme. One
comprehends how three years of the regime of the gendarme, consecrated
b. the regime of the priest, were bound to demoralize immature masses.

Whatever amount of passion and declamation might be employed by the
party of Order against the minority from the tribune of the National
Assembly, its speech remained as monosyllabic as that of the
Christians, whose words were to be: Yea, yea; nay, nay! As
monosyllabic on the platform as in the press. Flat as a riddle whose
answer is known in advance. Whether it was a question of the right of
petition or the tax on wine, freedom of the press or free trade, the
clubs or the municipal charter, protection of personal liberty or
regulation of the state budget, the watchword constantly recurs, the
theme remains always the same, the verdict is ever ready and
invariably reads: "Socialism!" Even bourgeois liberalism is declared
socialistic, bourgeois enlightenment socialistic, bourgeois financial
reform socialistic. It was socialistic to build a railway where a
canal already existed, and it was socialistic to defend oneself with a
cane when one was attacked with a rapier.

This was not merely a figure of speech, fashion, or party tactics. The
bourgeoisie had a true insight into the fact that all the weapons it
had forged against feudalism turned their points against itself, that
all the means of education it had produced rebelled against its own
civilization, that all the gods it had created had fallen away from
it. It understood that all the so-called bourgeois liberties and
organs of progress attacked and menaced its class rule at its social
foundation and its political summit simultaneously, and had therefore
become "socialistic." In this menace and this attack it rightly
discerned the secret of socialism, whose import and tendency it judges
more correctly than so-called socialism knows how to judge itself; the
latter can, accordingly, not comprehend why the bourgeoisie callously
hardens its heart against it, whether it sentimentally bewails the
sufferings of mankind, or in Christian spirit prophesies the
millennium and universal brotherly love, or in humanistic style
twaddles about mind, education, and freedom, or in doctrinaire fashion
invents a system for the conciliation and welfare of all classes. What
the bourgeoisie did not grasp, however, was the logical conclusion
that its own parliamentary regime, its political rule in general, was
now also bound to meet with the general verdict of condemnation as
being socialistic. As long as the rule of the bourgeois class had not
been completely organized, as long as it had not acquired its pure
political expression, the antagonism of the other classes likewise
could not appear in its pure form, and where it did appear could not
take the dangerous turn that transforms every struggle against the
state power into a struggle against capital. If in every stirring of
life in society it saw "tranquillity" imperiled, how could it want to
maintain at the head of society a regime of unrest, its own regime,
the parliamentary regime, this regime that, according to the
expression of one of its spokesmen, lives in struggle and by struggle?
The parliamentary regime lives by discussion-, how shall it forbid
discussion? Every interest, every social institution, is here
transformed into general ideas, debated as ideas; how shall any
interest, any institution, sustain itself above thought and impose
itself as an article of faith? The struggle of the orators on the
platform evokes the struggle of the scribblers of the press; the
debating club in parliament is necessarily supplemented by debating
clubs in the salons and the bistros; the representatives, who
constantly appeal to public opinion, give public opinion the right to
speak its real mind in petitions. The parliamentary regime leaves
everything to the decision of majorities; how shall the great
majorities outside parliament not want to decide? When you play the
fiddle at the top of the state, what else is to be expected but that
those down below dance?

Thus by now stigmatizing as "socialistic" what it had previously
extolled as "liberal," the bourgeoisie confesses that its own
interests dictate that it should be delivered from the danger of its
own rule; that to restore tranquillity in the country its bourgeois
parliament must, first of all, be given its quietus; that to preserve
its social power intact its political power must be broken; that the
individual bourgeois can continue to exploit the other classes and to
enjoy undisturbed property, family, religion, and order only on
condition that their class be condemned along with the other classes
to like political nullity; that in order to save its purse it must
forfeit the crown, and the sword that is to safeguard it must at the
same time be hung over its own head as a sword of Damocles.

In the domain of the interests of the general citizenry, the National
Assembly showed itself so unproductive that, for example, the
discussions on the Paris-Avignon railway, which began in the winter of
i850, were still not ripe for conclusion on December 2, 1851. Where it
did not repress or pursue a reactionary course it was stricken with
incurable barrenness.

While Bonaparte's ministry partly took the initiative in framing laws
in the spirit of the party of Order, and partly even outdid that
party's harshness in their execution and administration, he, on the
other hand, sought by childishly silly proposals to win popularity, to
bring out his opposition to the National Assembly, and to hint at a
secret reserve that was only temporarily prevented by conditions from
making its hidden treasures available to the French people. Such was
the proposal to decree an increase in pay of four sous a day to the
noncommissioned officers. Such was the proposal of an honor-system
loan bank for the workers. Money as a gift and money as a loan, it was
with prospects such as these that he hoped to lure the
masses. Donations and loans -- the financial science of the lumpen
proletariat, whether of high degree or low, is restricted to
this. Such were the only springs Bonaparte knew how to set in
action. Never has a pretender speculated more stupidly on the
stupidity of the masses.

The National Assembly flared up repeatedly over these unmistakable
attempts to gain popularity at its expense, over the growing danger
that this adventurer, whom his debts spurred on and no established
reputation held back, would venture a desperate coup. The discord
between the party of Order and the President had taken on a
threatening character when an unexpected event threw him back
repentant into its arms. We mean the by-elections of March 10,
1850. These elections were held for the purpose of filling the
representatives' seats that after June 13 had been rendered vacant by
imprisonment or exile. Paris elected only social-democratic
candidates. It even concentrated most of the votes on an insurgent of
June, 1848, on De Flotte. Thus did the Parisian petty bourgeoisie, in
alliance with the proletariat, revenge itself for its defeat on June
13, 1849. It seemed to have disappeared from the battlefield at the
moment of danger only to reappear there on a more propitious occasion
with more numerous fighting forces and with a bolder battle cry. One
circumstance seemed to heighten the peril of this election
victory. The army voted in Paris for the June insurgent against La
Hitte, a minister of Bonaparte's, and in the departments largely for
the Montagnards, who here too, though indeed not so decisively as in
Paris, maintained the ascendancy over their adversaries.

Bonaparte saw himself suddenly confronted with revolution once
more. As on January 29, 1849, as on June 13, 1849, so on March 10,
1850, he disappeared behind the party of Order. He made obeisance, he
pusillanimously begged pardon, he offered to appoint any ministry it
pleased at the behest of the parliamentary majority, he even implored
the Orleanist and Legitimist party leaders, the Thiers, the Berryers,
the Broglies, the Moles, in brief, the so- called burgraves, to take
the helm of state themselves. The party of Order proved unable to take
advantage of this opportunity that would never return. Instead of
boldly possessing itself of the power offered, it did not even compel
Bonaparte to reinstate the ministry dismissed on November 1; it
contented itself with humiliating him by its forgiveness and adjoining
M. Baroche to the Hautpoul Ministry. As public prosecutor this Baroche
had stormed and raged before the High Court at Bourges, the first time
against the revolutionists of May 15, the second time against the
democrats of June 13, both times because of an attempt on the life of
the National Assembly. None of Bonaparte's ministers subsequently
contributed more to the degradation of the National Assembly, and
after December 2, 1851, we meet him once more as the comfortably
installed and highly paid vice president of the Senate. He had spat in
the revolutionists' soup in order that Bonaparte might eat it up.

The social-democratic party, for its part, seemed only to look for
pretexts to put its own victory once again in doubt and to blunt its
point. Vidal, one of the newly elected representatives of Paris, had
been elected simultaneously in Strasbourg. He was induced to decline
the election for Paris and accept it for Strasbourg. And so, instead
of making its victory at the polls conclusive and thereby compelling
the party of Order to contest it in parliament at once, instead of
thus forcing the adversary to fight at the moment of popular
enthusiasm and favorable mood in the army, the democratic party
wearied Paris during the months of March and April with a new election
campaign, let the aroused popular passions wear themselves out in this
repeated provisional election game, let the revolutionary energy
satiate itself with constitutional successes, dissipate itself in
petty intrigues, hollow declamations, and sham movements, let the
bourgeoisie rally and make its preparations, and, lastly, weakened the
significance of the March elections by a sentimental commentary in the
April by-election, the election of Eugene Sue. In a word, it made an
April Fool of March 10.

The parliamentary majority understood the weakness of its
antagonist. Its seventeen burgraves -- for Bonaparte had left to it
the direction of and responsibility for the attack -- drew up a new
electoral law, the introduction of which was entrusted to M. Faucher,
who solicited this honor for himself. On May 8 he introduced the law
by which universal suffrage was to be abolished, a residence of three
years in the locality of the election to be imposed as a condition on
the electors, and finally, the proof of this residence made dependent
in the case of workers on a certificate from their employers.

Just as the democrats had, in revolutionary fashion, raged and
agitated during the constitutional election contest, so now, when it
was requisite to prove the serious nature of that victory arms in
hand, did they in constitutional fashion preach order, calme
majestueux, lawful action, that is to say, blind subjection to the
will of the counterrevolution, which imposed itself as the law. During
the debate the "Mountain" put the part of Order to shame by asserting,
against the latter's revolutionary passion, the dispassionate attitude
of the philistine who keeps within the law, and by felling that party
to earth with the fearful reproach that it was proceeding in a
revolutionary manner. Even the newly elected deputies were at pains to
prove by their decorous and discreet action what a misconception it
was to decry them as anarchists and construe their election as a
victory for revolution. On May 31 the new electoral law went
through. The Montagne contented itself with smuggling a protest into
the President's pocket. The electoral law was followed by a new press
law, by which the revolutionary newspaper press was entirely
suppressed. It had deserved its fate. The National and La Presse, two
bourgeois organs, were left after this deluge as the most advanced
outposts of the revolution.

We have seen how during March and April the democratic leaders had
done everything to embroil the people of Paris in a sham fight, how
after May 8 they did everything to restrain them from a real fight. In
addition to this, we must not forget that the year 1850 was one of the
most splendid years of industrial and commercial prosperity, and the
Paris proletariat was therefore fully employed. But the election law
of May 31, 1850, excluded it from any participation in political
power. It cut the proletariat off from the very arena of the
struggle. It threw the workers back into the position of pariahs which
they had occupied before the February Revolution. By letting
themselves be led by the democrats in the face of such an event and
forgetting the revolutionary interests of their class for momentary
case and comfort, they renounced the honor of being a conquering
power, surrendered to their fate, proved that the defeat of June,
1848, had put them out of the fight for years and that the historical
process would for the present again have to go on over their heads. As
for the petty-bourgeois democracy, which on June 13 had cried, "But if
once universal suffrage is attacked, then we'll show them," it now
consoled itself with the contention that the counterrevolutionary blow
which had struck it was no blow and the law of May 31 no law. On the
second Sunday in May, 1852, every Frenchman would appear at the
polling place with ballot in one hand and sword in the other. With
this prophecy it rested content. Lastly, the army was disciplined by
its superior officers for the elections of March and April, 1850, just
as it had been disciplined for those of May 28, 1849. This time,
however, it said decidedly: "The revolution shall not dupe us a third
time."

The law of May 31, 1850, was the coup d'etat of the bourgeoisie. All
its conquests over the revolution hitherto had only a provisional
character and were endangered as soon as the existing National
Assembly retired from the stage. They depended on the hazards of a new
general election, and the history of elections since 1848 irrefutably
proved that the bourgeoisie's moral sway over the mass of the people
was lost in the same measure as its actual domination developed. On
March 10 universal suffrage declared itself directly against the
domination of the bourgeoisie; the bourgeoisie answered by outlawing
universal suffrage. The law of May 31 was therefore one of the
necessities of the class struggle. On the other hand, the constitution
required a minimum of two million votes to make an election of the
President of the Republic valid. If none of the candidates for the
presidency received this minimum, the National Assembly was to choose
the President from among the three candidates to whom the largest
number of votes would fall. At the time when the Constituent Assembly
made this law, ten million electors were registered on the rolls of
voters. In its view, therefore, a fifth of the people entitled to vote
was sufficient to make the presidential election valid. The law of May
31 struck at least three million votes off the electoral rolls,
reduced the number of people entitled to vote to seven million, and
nevertheless retained the legal minimum of two million for the
presidential election. It therefore raised the legal minimum from a
fifth to nearly a third of the effective votes; that is, it did
everything to smuggle the election of the President out of the hands
of the people and into the hands of the National Assembly. Thus
through the electoral law of May 31 the party of Order seemed to have
made its rule doubly secure, by surrendering the election of the
National Assembly and that of the President of the Republic to the
stationary section of society.

V

As soon as the revolutionary crisis had been weathered and universal
suffrage abolished, the struggle between the National Assembly and
Bonaparte broke out again.

The constitution had fixed Bonaparte's salary at 600,000
francs. Barely six months after his installation he succeeded in
increasing this sum to twice as much, for Odilon Barrot wrung from the
Constituent National Assembly an extra allowance of 600,000 francs a
year for so-called representation moneys. After June 13 Bonaparte had
caused similar requests to be voiced, this time without eliciting
response from Barrot. Now, after May 3i, he at once availed himself of
the favorable moment and had his ministers propose a Civil List of
three millions in the National Assembly. A long life of adventurous
vagabondage had endowed him with the most developed antennae for
feeling out the weak moments when he might squeeze money from his
bourgeois. He practiced chantage [blackmail] regularly. The National
Assembly had violated the sovereignty of the people with his
assistance and his cognizance. He threatened to denounce its crime to
the tribunal of the people unless it loosened its purse strings and
purchased his silence with three million a year. It had robbed three
million Frenchmen of their franchise. He demanded, for every Frenchman
out of circulation, a franc in circulation, precisely three million
francs. He, the elect of six millions, claimed damages for the votes
which he said he had retrospectively been cheated out of. The
Commission of the National Assembly refused the importunate man. The
Bonapartist press threatened. Could the National Assembly break with
the President of the Republic at a moment when in principle it had
definitely broken with the mass of the nation? It rejected the annual
Civil List, it is true, but it granted, for this once, an extra
allowance of 2,160,000 francs. It thus rendered itself guilty of the
double weakness of granting the money and of showing at the same time
by its vexation that it granted it unwillingly. We shall see later for
what purpose Bonaparte needed the money. After this vexatious
aftermath, which followed on the heels of the abolition of universal
suffrage and in which Bonaparte exchanged his humble attitude during
the crisis of March and April for challenging impudence to the
usurpatory parliament, the National Assembly adjourned for three
months, from August ii to November ii. In its place it left behind a
Permanent Commission of twenty-eight members, which contained no
Bonapartists but did contain some moderate republicans. The Permanent
Commission of 1849 had included only Order men and Bonapartists. But
at that time the party of Order declared itself permanently against
the revolution. This time the parliamentary republic declared itself
permanently against the President. After the law of May 3 1, this was
the only rival that still confronted the party of Order.

When the National Assembly met once more in November, 1850, it seemed
that, instead of the petty skirmishes it had hitherto had with the
President, a great and ruthless struggle, a life-and-death struggle
between the two powers, had become inevitable.

As in 1849 so during this year's parliamentary recess -- the party of
Order had broken up into its separate factions, each occupied with its
own restoration intrigues, which had obtained fresh nutriment through
the death of Louis Philippe. The Legitimist king, Henry V, had even
nominated a formal ministry which resided in Paris and in which
members of the Permanent Commission held seats. Bonaparte, in his
turn, was therefore entitled to make tours of the French departments,
and according to the disposition of the town he favored with his
presence, now more or less covertly, now more or less overtly, to
divulge his own restoration plans and canvass votes for himself. On
these processions, which the great official Moniteur and the little
private Moniteurs of Bonaparte naturally had to celebrate as triumphal
processions, he was constantly accompanied by persons affiliated with
the Society of December 10. This society dates from the year 1849. On
the pretext of founding a benevolent society, the lumpen proletariat
of Paris had been organized into secret sections, each section led by
Bonapartist agents, with a Bonapartist general at the head of the
whole. Alongside decayed roues with dubious means of subsistence and
of dubious origin, alongside ruined and adventurous offshoots of the
bourgeoisie, were vagabonds, discharged soldiers, discharged
jailbirds, escaped galley slaves, swindlers, mountebanks, lazzaroni,
pickpockets, tricksters, gamblers, maquereaux [pimps], brothel
keepers, porters, literati, organ grinders, ragpickers, knife
grinders, tinkers, beggars-in short, the whole indefinite,
disintegrated mass, thrown hither and thither, which the French call
la bohime; from this kindred element Bonaparte formed the core of the
Society of December 10. A "benevolent society" -- insofar as, like
Bonaparte, all its members felt the need of benefiting themselves at
the expense of the laboring nation. This Bonaparte, who constitutes
himself chief of the lumpen proletariat, who here alone rediscovers in
mass form the interests which he personally pursues, who recognizes in
this scum, offal, refuse of all classes the only class upon which he
can base himself unconditionally, is the real Bonaparte, the Bonaparte
sans phrase. An old, crafty rou"š, he conceives the historical life of
the nations and their performances of state as comedy in the most
vulgar sense, as a masquerade in which the grand costumes, words, and
postures merely serve to mask the pettiest knavery. Thus his
expedition to Strasbourg, where the trained Swiss vulture played the
part of the Napoleonic eagle. For his irruption into Boulogne he puts
some London lackeys into French uniforms. They represent the army. In
his Society of December 10 he assembles ten thousand rascals who are
to play the part of the people as Nick Bottom [A character in
Shakespeare's Midsummer Night's Dream. -- Ed.] that of the lion. At a
moment when the bourgeoisie itself played the most complete comedy,
but in the most serious manner in the world, without infringing any of
the pedantic conditions of French dramatic etiquette, and was itself
half deceived, half convinced of the solemnity of its own performance
of state, the adventurer, who took the comedy as plain comedy, was
bound to win. Only when he has eliminated his solemn opponent, when he
himself now takes his imperial role seriously and under the Napoleonic
mask imagines he is the real Napoleon, does he become the victim of
his own conception of the world, the serious buffoon who no longer
takes world history for a comedy but his comedy for world
history. What the national ateliers were for the socialist workers,
what the Mobile Guards were for the bourgeois republicans, the Society
of December 10 was for Bonaparte, the party fighting force peculiar to
him. On his journeys the detachments of this society packing the
railways had to improvise a public for him, stage popular enthusiasm,
roar Vive I'Empereur, insult and thrash republicans, under police
protection, of course. On his return journeys to Paris they had to
form the advance guard, forestall counter-demonstrations or disperse
them. The Society of December 10 belonged to him, it was his work, his
very own idea. Whatever else he appropriates is put into his hands by
the force of circumstances; whatever else he does, the circumstances
do for him or he is content to copy from the deeds of others. But
Bonaparte with official phrases about order, religion, family, and
property in public, before the citizens, and with the secret society
of the Schufterles and Spiegelbergs, the society of disorder,
prostitution, and theft, behind him -- that is Bonaparte himself as
the original author, and the history of the Society of December 10 is
his own history.

Now it had happened by way of exception that people's representatives
belonging to the party of Order came under the cudgels of the
Decembrists. Still more. Yon, the police commissioner assigned to the
National Assembly and charged with watching over its safety, acting on
the deposition of a certain Allais, advised the Permanent Commission
that a section of the Decembrists had decided to assassinate General
Changarnier and Dupin, the President of the National Assembly, and had
already designated the individuals who were to perpetrate the
deed. One comprehends the terror of M. Dupin. A parliamentary inquiry
into the Society of December 10 -- that is, the profanation of the
Bonapartist secret world -- seemed inevitable. Just before the meeting
of the National Assembly Bonaparte providently disbanded his society,
naturally only on paper, for in a detailed memoir at the end of 1851
Police Prefect Carlier still sought in vain to move him to really
break up the Decembrists.

The Society of December 10 was to remain the private army of Bonaparte
until he succeeded in transforming the public army into a Society of
December 10. Bonaparte made the first attempt at this shortly after
the adjournment of the National Assembly, and precisely with the money
just wrested from it. As a fatalist, he lives in the conviction that
there are certain higher powers which man, and the soldier in
particular, cannot withstand. Among these powers he counts, first and
foremost, cigars and champagne, cold poultry and garlic
sausage. Accordingly, to begin with, he treats officers and
non-commissioned officers in his Elysee apartments to cigars and
champagne, cold poultry and garlic sausage. On October 3 he repeats
this maneuver with the mass of the troops at the St. Maur review, and
on October 10 the same maneuver on a still larger scale at the Satory
army parade. The uncle remembered the campaigns of Alexander in Asia,
the nephew the triumphal marches of Bacchus in the same
land. Alexander was a demigod, to be sure. But Bacchus was a god and
moreover the tutelary deity of the Society of December 10.

After the review of October 3, the Permanent Commission summoned War
Minister Hautpoul. He promised that these breaches of discipline would
not recur. We know how on October 10 Bonaparte kept Hautpoul's
word. As commander in chief of the Paris army, Changarnier had
commanded at both reviews. At once a member of the Permanent
Commission, chief of the National Guard, the "savior" of January 29
and June 13, the "bulwark of society," the candidate of the party of
Order for presidential honors, the suspected monk of two monarchies,
he had hitherto never acknowledged himself as the subordinate of the
War Minister, had always openly derided the republican constitution,
and had pursued Bonaparte with an ambiguous lordly protection. Now he
was consumed with zeal for discipline against the War Minister and for
the constitution against Bonaparte. While on October 10 a section of
the cavalry raised the shout: "Vive Napoleon! Vivent les saucissons!"
Changarnier arranged that at least the infantry marching past under
the command of his friend Neumayer should preserve an icy silence. As
a punishment, the War Minister relieved General Neumayer of his post
in Paris at Bonaparte's instigation, on the pretext of appointing him
commanding general of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth divisions. Neumayer
refused this exchange of posts and so had to resign. Changarnier, for
his part, published an order of the day on November 2 in which he
forbade the troops to indulge in political outcries or demonstrations
of any kind while under arms. The Elysee newspapers attacked
Changarnier; the papers of the party of Order attacked Bonaparte; the
Permanent Commission held repeated secret sessions in which it was
repeatedly proposed to declare the country in danger; the army seemed
divided into two hostile camps, with two hostile general staffs, one
in the Elysee, where Bonaparte resided, the other in the Tuileries,
the quarters of Changarnier. It seemed that only the meeting of the
National Assembly was needed to give the signal for battle. The French
public judged this friction between Bonaparte and Changarnier like the
English journalist who characterized it in these words: "The political
housemaids of France are sweeping away the glowing lava of the
revolution with old brooms and wrangle with one another while they do
their work."

Meanwhile, Bonaparte hastened to remove the War Minister Hautpoul, to
pack him off in all haste to Algiers, and to appoint General Schramm
War Minister in his place. On November 12 he sent to the National
Assembly a message of American prolixity, overloaded with detail,
redolent of order, desirous of reconciliation, constitutionally
acquiescent, treating of all and sundry, but not of the questions
brulantes [burning questions] of the moment. As if in passing, he made
the remark that according to the express provisions of the
constitution the President alone could dispose of the army. The
message closed with the following words of great solemnity: "Above all
things, France demands tranquillity.... But bound by an oath, I shall
keep within the narrow limits that it has set for me.... As far as I
am concerned, elected by the people and owing my power to it alone, I
shall always bow to its lawfully expressed will. Should you resolve at
this session on a revision of the constitution, a Constituent Assembly
will regulate the position of the executive power. If not, then the
people will solemnly pronounce its decision in 1852. But whatever the
solutions of the future may be, let us come to an understanding, so
that passion, surprise, or violence may never decide the destiny of a
great nation.... What occupies my attention, above all, is not who
will rule France in 1852, but how to employ the time which remains at
my disposal so that the intervening period may pass by without
agitation or disturbance. I have opened my heart to you with
sincerity; you will answer my frankness with your trust, my good
endeavors with your cooperation, and God will do the rest."

The respectable, hypocritically moderate, virtuously commonplace
language of the bourgeoisie reveals its deepest meaning in the mouth
of the autocrat of the Society of December 10 and the picnic hero of
St. Maur and Satory.

The burgraves of the party of Order did not delude themselves for a
moment concerning the trust that this opening of the heart
deserved. About oaths they had long been blas"š; they numbered in
their midst veterans and virtuosos of political perjury. Nor had they
failed to hear the passage about the army. They observed with
annoyance that in its discursive enumeration of lately enacted laws
the message passed over the most important law, the electoral law, in
studied silence, and moreover, in the event of there being no revision
of the constitution, left the election of the President in 1852 to the
people. The electoral law was the lead ball chained to the feet of the
party of Order, which prevented it from walking and so much the more
from storming forward! Moreover, by the official disbandment of the
Society of December 10 and the dismissal of War Minister Hautpoul,
Bonaparte had with his own hand sacrificed the scapegoats on the altar
of the country. He had blunted the edge of the expected
collision. Finally, the party of Order itself anxiously sought to
avoid, to mitigate, to gloss over any decisive conflict with the
executive power. For fear of losing their conquests over the
revolution, they allowed their rival to carry off the fruits
thereof. "Above all things, France demands tranquillity." This was
what the party of Order had cried to the revolution since February,
this was what Bonaparte's message cried to the party of Order. "Above
all things, France demands tranquillity." Bonaparte committed acts
that aimed at usurpation, but the party of Order committed "unrest" if
it raised a row about these acts and construed them
hypochondriacally. The sausages of Satory were quiet as mice when no
one spoke of them. "Above all things, France demands tranquillity."
Bonaparte demanded, therefore, that he be left in peace to do as he
liked and the parliamentary party was paralyzed by a double fear, the
fear of again evoking revolutionary unrest and the fear of itself
appearing as the instigator of unrest in the eyes of its own class, in
the eyes of the bourgeoisie. Consequently, since France demanded
tranquillity above all things, the party of Order dared not answer
"war" after Bonaparte had talked "peace" in his message. The public,
which had anticipated scenes of great scandal at the opening of the
National Assembly, was cheated of its expectations. The opposition
deputies, who demanded the submission of the Permanent Commission's
minutes on the October events, were outvoted by the majority. On
principle, all debates that might cause excitement were eschewed. The
proceedings of the National Assembly during November and December,
1850, were without interest.

At last, toward the end of December, guerrilla warfare began over a
number of prerogatives of parliament. The movement got bogged down in
petty squabbles about the prerogatives of the two powers, since the
bourgeoisie had done away with the class struggle for the moment by
abolishing universal suffrage.

A judgment for debt had been obtained from the court against Mauguin,
one of the people's representatives. In answer to the inquiry of the
president of the court, the Minister of Justice, Rouher, declared that
a capias should be issued against the debtor without further
ado. Mauguin was thus thrown into debtors' prison. The National
Assembly flared up when it learned of the assault. Not only did it
order his immediate release, but it even had him fetched forcibly from
Clichy the same evening, by its clerk. In order, however, to confirm
its faith in the sanctity of private property and with the idea at the
back of its mind of opening, in case of need, a place of safekeeping
for Montagnards who had become troublesome, it declared imprisonment
of people's representatives for debt permissible when its consent had
been previously obtained. It forgot to decree that the President might
also be locked up for debt. It destroyed the last semblance of the
immunity that enveloped the members of its own body.

It will be remembered that, acting on the information given by a
certain Allais, Police Commissioner Yon had denounced a section of the
Decembrists for planning the murders of Dupin and Changarnier. In
reference to this, at the very first session the quaestors made the
proposal that parliament should form a police force of its own, paid
out of the private budget of the National Assembly and absolutely
independent of the police prefect. The Minister of the Interior,
Baroche, protested against this invasion of his domain. A miserable
compromise on this matter was concluded, according to which, true, the
police commisioner of the Assembly was to be paid out of its private
budget and to be appointed and dismissed by its quaestors, but only
after previous agreement with the Minister of the Interior. Meanwhile
the government had started criminal proceedings against Alais, and
here it was easy to represent his information as a hoax and through
the mouth of the public prosecutor to cast ridicule upon Dupin,
Changarnier, Yon, and the whole National Assembly. Thereupon, on
December 29, Minister Baroche writes a letter to Dupin in which he
demands Yon's dismissal. The bureau of the Assembly, alarmed by its
violence in the Mauguin affair and accustomed when it has ventured a
blow at the executive power to receive two blows from it in return,
does not sanction this decision. It dismisses Yon as a reward for his
official zeal and robs itself of a parliamentary prerogative
indispensable against a man who does not decide by night in order to
execute by day, but decides by day and executes by night.

We have seen how on great and striking occasions during the months of
November and December the National Assembly avoided or quashed the
struggle with the executive power. Now we see it compelled to take up
the struggle on the pettiest occasions. In the Mauguin affair it
confirms the principle of imprisoning people's representatives for
debt, but reserves the right to have it applied only to
representatives obnoxious to itself and wrangles over this infamous
privilege with the Minister of justice. Instead of availing itself of
the alleged murder plot to decree an inquiry into the Society of
December 10 and irredeemably unmasking Bonaparte before France and
Europe in his true character of chief of the Paris lumpen proletariat,
it lets the conflict be degraded to a point where the only issue
between it and the Minister of the Interior is which of them has the
authority to appoint and dismiss a police commissioner. Thus during
the whole of this period we see the party of Order compelled by its
equivocal position to dissipate and disintegrate its struggle with the
executive power in petty jurisdictional squabbles, pettifoggery,
legalistic hairsplitting, and delimitational disputes, and to make the
most ridiculous matters of form the substance of its activity. It does
not dare take up the conflict at the moment when this has significance
from the standpoint of principle, when the executive power has really
exposed itself and the cause of the National Assembly would be the
cause of the nation. By so doing it would give the nation its
marching' orders, and it fears nothing more than that the nation
should move. On such occasions it accordingly rejects the motions of
the Montagne and proceeds to the order of the day. The question at
issue in its large aspects having thus been dropped, the executive
power calmly waits for the time when it can again take up the same
question on petty and insignificant occasions, when this is, so to
speak, of only local parliamentary interest. Then the repressed rage
of the party of Order breaks out, then it tears the curtain away from
the coulisses, then it denounces the President, then it declares the
republic in danger, but then, also, its fervor appears absurd and the
occasion for the struggle seems a hypocritical pretext or altogether
not worth fighting about. The parliamentary storm becomes a storm in a
teacup, the fight becomes an intrigue, the conflict a scandal. While
the revolutionary classes gloat with malicious joy over the
humiliation of the National Assembly, for they are just as
enthusiastic about the parliamentary prerogatives of this Assembly as
the latter is about the public liberties, the bourgeoisie outside
parliament does not understand how the bourgeoisie inside parliament
can waste time over such petty squabbles and imperil tranquillity by
such pitiful rivalries with the President. It becomes confused by a
strategy that makes peace at the moment when all the world is
expecting battles, and attacks at the moment when all the world
believes peace has been made.

On December 20 Pascal Duprat interpellated the Minister of the
Interior concerning the Gold Bars Lottery. This lottery was a
"daughter of Elysium." Bonaparte with his faithful followers had
brought her into the world and Police Prefect Carlier had placed her
under his official protection, although French law forbids all
lotteries except raffles for charitable purposes. Seven million
lottery tickets at a franc apiece, the profits ostensibly to be
devoted to shipping Parisian vagabonds to California. On the one hand,
golden dreams were to supplant the socialist dreams of the Paris
proletariat, the seductive prospect of the first prize the doctrinaire
right to work. Naturally the Paris workers did not recognize in the
glitter of the California gold bars the inconspicuous francs that were
enticed out of their pockets. In the main, however, the matter was
nothing short of a downright swindle. The vagabonds who wanted to open
California gold mines without troubling to leave Paris were Bonaparte
himself and his debt-ridden Round Table. The three millions voted by
the National Assembly had been squandered in riotous living; in one
way or another coffers had to be replenished. In vain had Bonaparte
opened a national subscription for the building of so-called cites
ouvrieres [workers' cities], and headed the list himself with a
considerable sum. The hardhearted bourgeois waited mistrustfully for
him to pay up his share, and since this naturally did not ensue, the
speculation in socialist castles in the air immediately fell to the
ground. The gold bars proved a better draw. Bonaparte & Co. were not
content to pocket part of the excess of the seven millions over the
bars to be allotted in prizes; they manufactured false lottery
tickets; they issued ten, fifteen, and even twenty tickets with the
same number -- a financial operation in the spirit of the Society of
December 10! Here the National Assembly was confronted not with the
fictitious President of the Republic but with Bonaparte in the
flesh. Here it could catch him in the act, in conflict not with the
constitution but with the Code penal. If after Duprat's interpellation
it proceeded to the order of the day, this did not happen merely
because Girardin's motion that it should declare itself "satisfied"
reminded the party of Order of its own systematic corruption. The
bourgeois, and above all the bourgeois inflated into a statesman,
supplements his practical meanness by theoretical extravagance. As a
statesman he becomes, like the state power that confronts him, a
higher being that can be fought only in a higher, consecrated fashion.

Bonaparte, who precisely because he was a bohemian, a princely lumpen
proletarian, had the advantage over a rascally bourgeois in that he
could conduct the struggle meanly, now saw, after the Assembly guided
him with its own hand across the slippery ground of the military
banquets, the reviews, the Society of December 10, and finally the
Code penal, that the moment had come when he could pass from an
apparent defensive to the offensive. The minor defeats meanwhile
sustained by the Minister of justice, the Minister of War, the
Minister of the Navy, and the Minister of Finance, through which the
National Assembly signified its snarling displeasure, troubled him
little. He not only prevented the ministers from resigning and thus
recognizing the sovereignty of parliament over the executive power,
but could now consummate what he had begun during the recess of the
National Assembly: the severance of the military power from
parliament, the removal of Changarnier.

An Elysee paper published an order of the day alleged to have been
addressed during the month of May to the First Army Division, and
therefore proceeding from Changarnier, in which the officers were
urged, in the event of an insurrection, to give no quarter to the
traitors in their own ranks, but to shoot them immediately, and to
refuse troops to the National Assembly if it should requisition
them. On January 3, 1851, the cabinet was interpellated concerning
this order of the day. For the investigation of this matter it
requests a breathing space, first of three months, then of a week,
finally of only twenty-four hours. The Assembly insists on an
immediate explanation. Changarnier rises and declares that there never
was such an order of the day. He adds that he will always hasten to
comply with the demands of the National Assembly and that in case of a
clash it can count on him. It receives his declaration with
indescribable applause and passes a vote of confidence in him. It
abdicates, it decrees its own impotence and the omnipotence of the
army by placing itself under the private protection of a general; but
the general deceives himself when he puts at its command against
Bonaparte a power that he holds only as a fief from the same
Bonaparte, and when, in his turn, he expects to be protected by this
parliament, his own protege in need of protection. Changarnier,
however, believes in the mysterious power with which the bourgeoisie
has endowed him since January 29, 1849. He considers himself the third
power, existing side by side with both the other state powers. He
shares the fate of the rest of this epoch's heroes, or rather saints,
whose greatness consists precisely in the biased great opinion of them
that their party creates in its own interests and who shrink to
everyday figures as soon as circumstances call on them to perform
miracles. Unbelief is, in general, the mortal enemy of these reputed
heroes who are really saints. Hence their majestically moral
indignation at the dearth of enthusiasm displayed by wits and
scoffers.

That same evening the ministers were summoned to the Elysee. Bonaparte
insists on the dismissal of Changarnier; five ministers refuse to
sign; the Moniteur announces a ministerial crisis, and the press of
the party of Order threatens to form a parliamentary army under
Changarnier's command. The party of Order had constitutional authority
to take this step. It merely had to appoint Changarnier president of
the National Assembly and requisition any number of troops it pleased
for its protection. It could do so all the more safely as Changarnier
still actually stood at the head of the army and the Paris National
Guard and was only waiting to be requisitioned together with the
army. The Bonapartist press did not as yet even dare to question the
right of the National Assembly to requisition troops directly, a legal
scruple that in the given circumstances did not look promising. That
the army would have obeyed the order of the National Assembly is
probable when one bears in mind that Bonaparte had to search all Paris
for eight days in order, finally, to find two generals -- Baraguay
d'Hilliers and Saint-Jean d'Angely -- who declared themselves ready to
countersign Changarnier's dismissal. That the party of Order, however,
would have found in its own ranks and in parliament the necessary
number of votes for such a resolution is more than doubtful, when one
considers that eight days later two hundred and eighty-six votes
detached themselves from the party and that in December, 1851, at the
last hour of decision, the Montagne still rejected a similar
proposal. Nevertheless, the burgraves might, perhaps, still have
succeeded in spurring the mass of their party to a heroism that
consisted in feeling themselves secure behind a forest of bayonets and
accepting the services of an army that had deserted to their
camp. Instead of this, on the evening of January 6, Messrs. the
Burgraves betook themselves to the Elysee to make Bonaparte desist
from dismissing Changarnier by using statesmanlike phrases and urging
considerations of state. Whomever one seeks to persuade, one
acknowledges as master of the situation. On January 12, Bonaparte,
assured by this step, appoints a new ministry in which the leaders of
the old ministry, Fould and Baroche, remain. Saint-Jean D'Angely
becomes War Minister, the Moniteur publishes the decree dismissing
Changarnier, and his command is divided between Baraguay d'Hilliers,
who receives the First Army Division, and Perrot, who receives the
National Guard. The bulwark of society has been discharged, and while
this does not cause any tiles to fall from the roofs, quotations on
the Bourse are, on the other hand, going up.

By repulsing the army, which places itself in the person of
Changarnier at its disposal, and so surrendering the army irrevocably
to the President, the party of Order declares that the bourgeoisie has
forfeited its vocation to rule. A parliamentary ministry no longer
existed. Having now indeed lost its grip on the army and the National
Guard, what forcible means remained to it with which simultaneously to
maintain the usurped authority of parliament over the people and its
constitutional authority against the President? None. Only the appeal
to impotent principles remained to it now, to principles that it had
itself always interpreted merely as general rules, which one
prescribes for others in order to be able to move all the more freely
oneself. The dismissal of Changarnier and the falling of the military
power into Bonaparte's hands closes the first part of the period we
are considering, the period of struggle between the party of Order and
the executive power. War between the two powers has now been openly
declared, is openly waged, but only after the party of Order has lost
both arms and soldiers. Without the ministry, without the army,
without the people, without public opinion, after its electoral law of
May 3i no longer the representative of the sovereign nation, sans
eyes, sans ears, sans teeth, sans everything, the National Assembly
had undergone a gradual transformation into an ancient French
parliament that has to leave action to the government and content
itself with growling remonstrances post festum [belatedly].

The party of Order receives the new ministry with a storm of
indignation. General Bedeau recalls to mind the mildness of the
Permanent Commission during the recess, and the excessive
consideration it showed by waiving the publication of its minutes. The
Minister of the Interior himself now insists on the publication of
these minutes, which by this time have naturally become as dull as
ditch water, disclose no fresh facts, and have not the slightest
effect on the blas"š public. Upon Remusat's proposal the National
Assembly retires into its office and appoints a "Committee for
Extraordinary Measures." Paris departs the less from the rut of its
everyday routine because at this moment trade is prosperous, factories
are busy, corn prices low, foodstuffs overflowing, and the savings
banks receiving fresh deposits daily. The "extraordinary measures"
that parliament has announced with so much noise fizzle out on January
18 in a no-confidence vote against the ministry without General
Changarnier ever being mentioned. The party of Order was forced to
frame its motion in this way to secure the votes of the republicans,
since of all the ministry's measures, Changarnier's dismissal was
precisely the only one the republicans approved of, while the party of
Order was in fact not in a position to Censure the other ministerial
acts, which it had itself dictated.

The no-confidence vote of January 18 was passed by four hundred and
fifteen votes to two hundred and eighty-six. Thus, it was carried only
by a coalition of the extreme Legitimists and Orleanists with the pure
republicans and the Montagne. Thus it proved that the party of Order
had lost in conflicts with Bonaparte not only the ministry, not only
the army, but also its independent parliamentary majority; that a
squad of representatives had deserted its camp, out of fanaticism for
conciliation, out of fear of the struggle, out of lassitude, out of
family regard for the state salaries so near and dear to them, out of
speculation about ministerial posts becoming vacant (Odilon Barrot),
out of sheer egoism, which makes the ordinary bourgeois always
inclined to sacrifice the general interest of his class for this or
that private motive. From the first, the Bonapartist representatives
adhered to the party of Order only in the struggle against
revolution. The leader of the Catholic party, Montalembert, had
already at that time thrown his influence into the Bonapartist scale,
since he despaired of the parliamentary party's prospects of
life. Lastly, the leaders of this party, Thiers and Berryer, the
Orleanist and the Legitimist, were compelled openly to proclaim
themselves republicans, to confess that their hearts were royalist but
their heads republican, that the parliamentary republic was the sole
possible form for the rule of the bourgeoisie as a whole. Thus they
were compelled, before the eyes of the bourgeois class itself, to
stigmatize the restoration plans, which they continued indefatigably
to pursue behind parliament's back, as an intrigue as dangerous as it
was brainless.

The no-confidence vote of January 18 hit the ministers and not the
President. But it was not the ministry, it was the President who had
dismissed Changarnier. Should the party of Order impeach Bonaparte
himself? Because of his restoration desires? The latter merely
supplemented their own. Because of his conspiracy in connection with
the military reviews and the Society of December 10? They had buried
these themes long since under routine orders of the day. Because of
the dismissal of the hero of January 29 and June 13, the man who in
May, 1850, threatened to set fire to all four corners of Paris in the
event of a rising? Their allies of the Montagne and Cavaignac did not
even allow them to raise the fallen bulwark of society by means of an
official attestation of sympathy. They themselves could not deny the
President the constitutional authority to dismiss a general. They only
raged because he made an unparliamentary use of his constitutional
right. Had they not continually made an unconstitutional use of their
parliamentary prerogative, particularly in regard to the abolition of
universal suffrage? They were therefore reduced to moving within
strictly parliamentary limits. And it took that peculiar malady which
since 1848 has raged all over the Continent, parliamentary cretinism,
which holds those infected by it fast in an imaginary world and robs
them of all sense, all memory, all understanding of the rude external
world -- it took this parliamentary cretinism for those who had
destroyed all the conditions of parliamentary power with their own
hands, and were bound to destroy them in their struggle with the other
classes, still to regard their parliamentary victories as victories
and to believe they hit the President by striking at his
ministers. They merely gave him the opportunity to humiliate the
National Assembly afresh in the eyes of the nation. On January 20 the
Moniteur announced that the resignation of the entire ministry had
been accepted. On the pretext that no parliamentary party any longer
had a majority -- as the vote of January 18, this fruit of the
coalition between Montagne and royalists, proved -- and pending the
formation of a new ministry, of which not one member was an Assembly
representative, all being absolutely unknown and insignificant
individuals; a ministry of mere clerks and copyists. The party of
Order could now work to exhaustion playing with these marionettes; the
executive power no longer thought it worth while to be seriously
represented in the National Assembly. The more his ministers were pure
dummies, the more obviously Bonaparte concentrated the whole executive
power in his own person and the more scope he had to exploit it for
his own ends.

In coalition with the Montagne, the party of Order revenged itself by
rejecting the grant to the President of 1,800,000 francs which the
chief of the Society of December 10 had compelled his ministerial
clerks to propose. This time a majority of only a hundred and two
votes decided the matter; thus twenty-seven fresh votes had fallen
away since January 18; the dissolution of the party of Order was
progressing. At the same time, so there might not for a moment be any
mistake about the meaning of its coalition with the Montagne, it
scorned even to consider a proposal signed by a hundred and
eighty-nine members of the Montagne calling for a general amnesty of
political offenders. It sufficed for the Minister of the Interior, a
certain Vaisse, to declare that the tranquillity was only apparent,
that in secret great agitation prevailed, that in secret ubiquitous
societies were being organized, the democratic papers were preparing
to come out again, the reports from the departments were unfavorable,
the Geneva refugees were directing a conspiracy spreading by way of
Lyon all over the South of France, France was on the verge of an
industrial and commercial crisis, the manufacturers of Roubaix had
reduced working hours, the prisoners of Belle Isle were in revolt --
it sufficed for even a mere Vaisse to conjure up the red specter and
the party of Order rejected without discussion a motion that would
certainly have won the National Assembly immense popularity and thrown
Bonaparte back into its arms. Instead of letting itself be intimidated
by the executive power with the prospect of fresh disturbances, it
ought rather to have allowed the class struggle a little elbow room,
so as to keep the executive power dependent on it. But it did not feel
equal to the task of playing with fire.

Meanwhile the so-called transition ministry continued to vegetate
until the middle of April. Bonaparte wearied and befooled the National
Assembly with continual new ministerial combinations. Now he seemed to
want to form a republican ministry with Lamartine and Billault, now a
parliamentary one with the inevitable Odilon Barrot, whose name is
never missing when a dupe is necessary, then a Legitimist ministry
with Vatimesnil and Benoit d'Azy, and then again an Orleanist one with
Maleville. While he thus kept the different factions of the party of
Order in tension against one another, and alarmed them as a whole by
the prospect of a republican ministry and the consequent inevitable
restoration of universal suffrage, he at the same time engendered in
the bourgeoisie the conviction that his honest efforts to form a
parliamentary ministry were being frustrated by the irreconcilability
of the royalist factions. The bourgeoisie, however, cried out all the
louder for a "strong government"; it found it all the more
unpardonable to leave France "without administration," the more a
general commercial crisis seemed now to be approaching, and won
recruits for socialism in the towns just as the ruinously low price of
corn did in the countryside. Trade daily became slacker, the number of
unemployed increased perceptibly; ten thousand workers, at least, were
breadless in Paris, innumerable factories stood idle in Rouen,
Mulhouse, Lyon, Roubaix, Tourcoing, St. Ettienne, Elbeuf, etc. Under
these circumstances Bonaparte could venture, on April ii, to restore
the ministry of January 18: Messrs. Rouher, Fould, Baroche, etc.,
reinforced by M. Leon Faucher, whom the Constituent Assembly during
its last days had, with the exception of five votes cast by ministers,
unanimously stigmatized by a vote of no confidence for sending out
false telegrams. The National Assembly had therefore gained a victory
over the ministry on January 18, had struggled with Bonaparte for
three months, only to have Fould and Baroche on April 11 admit the
puritan Faucher as a third party into their ministerial alliance.

In November, 1849, Bonaparte had contented himself with an
unparliamentary ministry, in January, 1851, with an
extra-parliamentary one, and on April 11 he felt strong enough to form
an anti-parliamentary ministry, which harmoniously combined in itself
the no-confidence votes of both Assemblies, the Constituent and the
Legislative, the republican and the royalist. This gradation of
ministries was the thermometer with which parliament could measure the
decrease of its own vital heat. By the end of April the latter had
fallen so low that Persigny, in a personal interview, could urge
Changarnier to go over to the camp of the President. Bonaparte, he
assured him, regarded the influence of the National Assembly as
completely destroyed, and the proclamation was already prepared that
was to be published after the coup d'etat, which was kept steadily in
view but was by chance again postponed. Changarnier informed the
leaders of the party of Order of the obituary notice, but who believes
that bedbug bites are fatal? And parliament, stricken, disintegrated,
and death-tainted as it was, could not prevail upon itself to see in
its duel with the grotesque chief of the Society of December 10
anything but a duel with a bedbug. But Bonaparte answered the party of
Order as Agesilaus did King Agis: "I seem to thee an ant, but one day
I shall be a lion." [Paraphrase of a story by the Greek writer
Athenaeus (ca. second century AD) in his book, Deipnosophistae. --
Ed.]

VI

The coalition with the Montagne and the pure republicans, to which the
party of Order saw itself condemned in its unavailing efforts to
maintain possession of the military power and to reconquer supreme
control of the executive power, proved incontrovertibly that it had
forfeited its independent parliamentary majority. On May 28 the mere
power of the calendar, of the hour hand of the clock, gave the signal
for its complete disintegration. With May 28, the last year of the
life of the National Assembly began. It now had to decide for
continuing the constitution unaltered or for revising it. But revision
of the constitution -- that implied not only rule of the bourgeoisie
or of the petty-bourgeois democracy, democracy or proletarian anarchy,
parliamentary republic or Bonaparte, it implied at the same time
Orleans or Bourbon! Thus fell in the midst of parliament the apple of
discord that was bound to inflame openly the conflict of interests
which split the party of Order into hostile factions. The party of
Order was a combination of heterogeneous social substances. The
question of revision generated a political temperature at which the
product again decomposed into its original components.

The Bonapartists' interest in a revision was simple. For them it was
above all a question of abolishing Article 45, which forbade
Bonaparte's reelection and the prolongation of his authority. No less
simple appeared the position of the republicans. They unconditionally
rejected any revision; they saw in it a universal conspiracy against
the republic. Since they commanded more than a quarter of the votes in
the National Assembly, and according to the constitution
three-quarters of the votes were required for a resolution for
revision to be legally valid and for the convocation of a revising
Assembly, they needed only to count their votes to be sure of
victory. And they were sure of victory.

As against these clear positions, the party of Order found itself
inextricably caught in contradictions. If it should reject revision,
it would imperil the status quo, since it would leave Bonaparte only
one way out, that of force; and since on the second Sunday in May,
1852, at the decisive moment, it would be surrendering France to
revolutionary anarchy, with a President who had lost his authority,
with a parliament which for a long time had not possessed it, and with
a people that meant to reconquer it. If it voted for constitutional
revision, it knew that it voted in vain and would be bound to fail
constitutionally because of the republicans' veto. If it
unconstitutionally declared a simple majority vote to be binding, it
could hope to dominate the revolution only if it subordinated itself
unconditionally to the sovereignty of the executive power; then it
would make Bonaparte master of the constitution, of its revision, and
of the party itself. A partial revision, which would prolong the
authority of the President, would pave the way for imperial
usurpation. A general revision, which would shorten the existence of
the republic, would bring the dynastic claims into unavoidable
conflict, for the conditions of a Bourbon and an Orleanist restoration
were not only different, they were mutually exclusive.

The parliamentary republic was more than the neutral territory on
which the two factions of the French bourgeoisie, Legitimists and
Orleanists, large landed property and industry, could dwell side by
side with equality of rights. It was the unavoidable condition of
their common rule, the sole form of state in which their general class
interest subjected to itself at the same time both the claims of their
particular factions and all the remaining classes of society. As
royalists they fell back into their old antagonism, into the struggle
for the supremacy of landed property or of money, and the highest
expression of this antagonism, its personification, was their kings
themselves, their dynasties. Hence the resistance of the party of
Order to the recall of the Bourbons.

The Orleanist and people's representative Creton had in 1849, 1850,
and 1851 periodically introduced a motion for the revocation of the
decree exiling the royal families. Just as regularly, parliament
presented the spectacle of an Assembly of royalists that obdurately
barred the gates through which their exiled kings might return
home. Richard III murdered Henry VI, remarking that he was too good
for this world and belonged in heaven. The royalists declared France
too bad to possess her kings again. Constrained by force of
circumstances, they had become republicans and repeatedly sanctioned
the popular decision that banished their kings from France.

A revision of the constitution -- and circumstances compelled taking
that into consideration -- called in question, along with the
republic, the common rule of the two bourgeois factions, and revived,
with the possibility of a monarchy, the rivalry of the interests which
the monarchy had predominantly represented by turns, the struggle for
the supremacy of one faction over the other. The diplomats of the
party of Order believed they could settle the struggle by an
amalgamation of the two dynasties, by a so-called fusion of the
royalist parties and their royal houses. The real fusion of the
Restoration and the July Monarchy was the parliamentary republic, in
which Orleanist and Legitimist colors were obliterated and the various
species of bourgeois disappeared into the bourgeois as such, the
bourgeois genus. Now, however, Orleanist was to become Legitimist and
Legitimist Orleanist. Royalty, in which their antagonism was
personified, was to embody their unity, the expression of their
exclusive factional interests was to become the expression of their
common class interest, the monarchy was to do what only the abolition
of two monarchies, the republic, could do and had done. This was the
philosopher's stone, to produce which the doctors of the party of
Order racked their brains. As if the Legitimist monarchy could ever
become the monarchy of the industrial bourgeois or the bourgeois
monarchy ever become the monarchy of the hereditary landed
aristocracy. As if landed property and industry could fraternize under
one crown, when the crown could descend to only one head, the head of
the elder brother or of the younger. As if industry could come to
terms with landed property at all, so long as landed property itself
does not decide to become industrial. If Henry V should die tomorrow,
the Count of Paris would not on that account become the king of the
Legitimists unless he ceased to be the king of the Orleanists. The
philosophers of fusion, however, who became more vociferous in
proportion as the question of revision came to the fore, who had
provided themselves with an official daily organ in the Assemblee
Nationale, and who are again at work even at this very moment
(February, 1852), considered the whole difficulty to be due to the
opposition and rivalry of the two dynasties. The attempts to reconcile
the Orleans family with Henry V, begun since the death of Louis
Philippe, but, like the dynastic intrigues generally, played at only
while the National Assembly was in recess, during the entr'actes,
behind the scenes -- sentimental coquetry with the old superstition
rather than seriously meant business -- now became grand performances
of state, enacted by the party of Order on the public stage, instead
of in amateur theatricals as before. The couriers sped from Paris to
Venice, from Venice to Claremont, from Claremont to Paris. The Count
of Chambord issues a manifesto in which "with the help of all the
members of his family" he announces not his, but the "national"
restoration. The Orleanist Salvandy throws himself at the feet of
Henry V. The Legitimist chiefs, Berryer, Benoit d'Azy, Saint-Priest,
travel to Claremont to persuade the Orleans set, but in vain. The
fusionists perceive too late that the interests of the two bourgeois
factions neither lose exclusiveness nor gain pliancy when they become
accentuated in the form of family interests, the interests of two
royal houses. If Henry V were to recognize the Count of Paris as his
heir -- the sole success that the fusion could achieve at best -- the
House of Orleans would not win any claim that the childlessness of
Henry V had not already secured to it, but it would lose all the
claims it had gained through the July Revolution. It would waive its
original claims, all the titles it had wrested from the older branch
of the Bourbons in almost a hundred years of struggle; it would barter
away its historical prerogative, the prerogative of the modern
kingdom, for the prerogative of its genealogical tree. The fusion,
therefore, would be nothing but a voluntary abdication of the House of
Orleans, its resignation to Legitimacy, repentant withdrawal from the
Protestant state church into the Catholic. A withdrawal, moreover,
that would not even bring it to the throne it had lost, but to the
steps of the throne where it had been born. The old Orleanist
ministers, Guizot, Duchatel, etc., who likewise hastened to Claremont
to advocate the fusion, in fact represented merely the Katzenjammer
over the July Revolution, the despair about the bourgeois kingdom and
the kingliness of the bourgeois, the superstitious belief in
Legitimacy as the last charm against anarchy. Imagining themselves
mediators between Orleans and Bourbons, they were in reality merely
Orleanist renegades, and the Prince of Joinville received them as
such. On the other hand, the viable, bellicose section of the
Orleanists, Thiers, Baze, etc., convinced Louis Philippe's family all
the more easily that if any directly monarchist restoration
presupposed the fusion of the two dynasties, and if any such fusion
presupposed abdication of the House of Orleans, it was, on the
contrary, wholly in accord with the tradition of their forefathers to
recognize the republic for the moment and wait until events permitted
the conversion of the presidential chair into a throne. Rumors of
Joinville's candidature were circulated, public curiosity was kept in
suspense, and a few months later, in September, after the rejection of
revision, his candidature was publicly proclaimed.

The attempt at a royalist fusion of Orleanists with Legitimists had
thus not only failed; it had destroyed their parliamentary fusion,
their common republican form, and had broken up the party of Order
into its original component parts; but the more the estrangement
between Claremont and Venice grew, the more their settlement collapsed
and the Joinville agitation gained ground, so much the more eager and
earnest became the negotiations between Bonaparte's minister Faucher
and the Legitimists.

The disintegration of the party of Order did not stop at its original
elements. Each of the two great factions, in its turn, decomposed all
over again. It was as if all the old shadings that had formerly fought
and jostled one another within each of the two circles, whether
Legitimist or Orleanist, had thawed out again like dry Infusoria on
contact with water, as if they had acquired anew sufficient vital
energy to form groups of their own and independent antagonisms. The
Legitimists dreamed they were back among the controversies between the
Tuileries and the Pavillon Marsan, between Villele and Polignac. The
Orleanists relived the golden days of the tourney between Guizot,
Mole, Broglie, Thiers, and Odilon Barrot.

The section of the party of Order that was eager for revision, but was
divided again on the limits to revisions -- a section composed of the
Legitimists led by Berryer and Falloux, on the one hand, and by La
Rochejaquelein, on the other, and of the conflict-weary Orleanists led
by Mole, Broglie, Montalembert and Odilon Barrot -- agreed with the
Bonapartist representatives on the following indefinite and broadly
framed motion: "With the object of restoring to the nation the full
exercise of its sovereignty, the undersigned representatives move that
the constitution be revised."

At the same time, however, they unanimously declared through their
reporter Tocqueville that the National Assembly had no right to move
the abolition of the republic, that this right was vested solely in
the Revising Chamber. For the rest, the constitution might be revised
only in a "legal" manner, hence only if the constitutionally
prescribed three-quarters of the number of votes were cast in favor of
revision. On July 19, after six days of stormy debate, revision was
rejected, as was to be anticipated. Four hundred and forty-six votes
were cast for it, but two hundred and seventy-eight against. The
extreme Orleanists, Thiers, Changarnier, etc., voted with the
republicans and the Montagne.

Thus the majority of parliament declared against the constitution, but
this constitution itself declared for the minority and that its vote
was binding. But had not the party of Order subordinated the
constitution to the parliamentary majority on May 3I, 1850, and on
June 13, 1849? Up to now, was not its whole policy based on the
subordination of the paragraphs of the constitution to the decisions
of the parliamentary majority? Had it not left to the democrats the
antediluvian superstitious belief in the letter of the law, and
castigated the democrats for it? At the present moment, however,
revision of the constitution meant nothing but continuation of the
presidential authority, just as continuation of the constitution meant
nothing but Bonaparte's deposition. Parliament had declared for him,
but the constitution declared against parliament. He therefore acted
in the sense of parliament when he tore up the constitution and acted
in the sense of the constitution when he adjourned parliament.

Parliament had declared the constitution and, with the latter, its own
rule to be "beyond the majority"; by its vote it had abolished the
constitution and prolonged the term of presidential power, while
declaring at the same time that neither could the one die nor the
other live so long as the Assembly itself continued to exist. Those
who were to bury it were standing at the door. While it debated on
revision, Bonaparte removed General Baraguay d'Hilliers, who had
proved irresolute, from the command of the First Army Division and
appointed in his place General Magnan, the victor of Lyon, the hero of
the December days, one of his creatures, who under Louis Philippe had
already more or less compromised himself in Bonaparte's favor on the
occasion of the Boulogne expedition.

The party of Order proved by its decision on revision that it knew
neither how to rule nor how to serve; neither how to live nor how to
die; neither how to suffer the republic nor how to overthrow it;
neither how to uphold the constitution nor how to throw it overboard;
neither how to cooperate with the President nor how to break with
him. To whom, then, did it look for the solution of all the
contradictions? To the calendar, to the course of events. It ceased to
presume to sway them. It therefore challenged events to assume sway
over it, and thereby challenged the power to which, in the struggle
against the people, it had surrendered one attribute after another
until it stood impotent before this power. In order that the head of
the executive power might be able the more undisturbedly to draw up
his plan of campaign against it, strengthen his means of attack,
select his tools, and fortify his positions, it resolved precisely at
this critical moment to retire from the stage and adjourn for three
months, from August 10 to November 4.

The parliamentary party was not only dissolved into its two great
factions, each of these factions was not only split up within itself,
but the party of Order in parliament had fallen out with the party of
Order outside parliament. The spokesmen and scribes of the
bourgeoisie, its platform and its press -- in short, the ideologists
of the bourgeoisie and the bourgeoisie itself, the representatives and
the represented -- faced one another in estrangement and no longer
understood one another.

The Legitimists in the provinces, with their limited horizon and
unlimited enthusiasm, accused their parliamentary leaders, Berryer and
Falloux, of deserting to the Bonapartist camp and of defection from
Henry V. Their fleur-de-lis minds believed in the fall of man, but not
in diplomacy.

Far more fateful and decisive was the breach of the commercial
bourgeoisie with its politicians. It reproached them not as the
Legitimists reproached theirs, with having abandoned their principles,
but on the contrary, with clinging to principles that had become
useless.

I have indicated above that since Fould's entry into the ministry the
section of the commercial bourgeoisie which had held the lion's share
of power under Louis Philippe, namely, the aristocracy of finance, had
become Bonapartist. Fould not only represented Bonaparte's interests
in the Bourse, he represented at the same time the interests of the
Bourse before Bonaparte. The position of the aristocracy of finance is
most strikingly depicted in a passage from its European organ, the
London Economist. In the issue of February 1, 1851, its Paris
correspondent writes: "Now we have it stated from numerous quarters
that above all things France demands tranquillity. The President
declares it in his message to the Legislative Assembly; it is echoed
from the tribune; it is asserted in the journals; it is announced from
the pulpit, it is demonstrated by the sensitiveness of the public
funds at the least prospect of disturbance, and their firmness the
instant it is made manifest that the executive is victorious."

In its issue of November 29, 1851, the Economist declares in its own
name: "The President is the guardian of order, and is now recognized
as such on every stock exchange of Europe."

The aristocracy of finance, therefore, condemned the parliamentary
struggle of the party of Order with the executive power as a
disturbance of order, and celebrated every victory of the President
over its ostensible representatives as a victory of order. By the
aristocracy of finance must here be understood not merely the great
loan promoters and speculators in public funds, in regard to whom it
is immediately obvious that their interests coincide with the
interests of the state power. All modern finance, the whole of the
banking business, is inter- woven in the closest fashion with public
credit. A part of their business capital is necessarily invested and
put out at interest in quickly convertible public funds. Their
deposits, the capital placed at their disposal and distributed by them
among merchants and industrialists, are partly derived from the
dividends of holders of government securities. If in every epoch the
stability of the state power signified Moses and the prophets to the
entire money market and to the priests of this money market, why not
all the more so today, when every deluge threatens to sweep away the
old states, and the old state debts with them?

The industrial bourgeoisie too, in its fanaticism for order, was
angered by the squabbles of the parliamentary party of Order with the
executive power. After their vote of January 18 on the occasion of
Changarnier's dismissal, Thiers, Angles, Sainte-Beuve, etc., received
from their constituents, in precisely the industrial districts, public
reproofs in which their coalition with the Montagne was especially
scourged as high treason to order. If, as we have seen, the boastful
taunts, the petty intrigues which marked the struggle of the party of
Order with the President merited no better reception, then on the
other hand this bourgeois party, which required its representatives to
allow the military power to pass from its own parliament to an
adventurous pretender without offering resistance, was not even worth
the intrigues that were squandered in its interests. It proved that
the struggle to maintain its public interests, its own class
interests, its political power, only troubled and upset it, as it
disturbed private business.

With barely an exception the bourgeois dignitaries of the departmental
towns, the municipal authorities, the judges of the commercial courts,
etc., everywhere received Bonaparte on his tours in the most servile
manner, even when, as in Dijon, he made an unrestrained attack on the
National Assembly, and especially on the party of Order.

When trade was good, as it still was at the beginning of 1851, the
commercial bourgeoisie raged against any parliamentary struggle, lest
trade be put out of humor. When trade was bad, as it continually was
from the end of February, 1851, the commercial bourgeoisie accused the
parliamentary struggles of being the cause of stagnation and cried out
for them to stop so that trade could start again. The revision debates
came on just in this bad period. Since the question here was whether
the existing form of state was to be or not to be, the bourgeoisie
felt all the more justified in demanding from its representatives the
ending of this torturous provisional arrangement and at the same time
the maintenance of the status quo. There was no contradiction in
this. By the end of the provisional arrangement it understood
precisely its continuation, the postponement to a distant future of
the moment when a decision had to be reached. The status quo could be
maintained in only two ways: prolongation of Bonaparte's authority or
his constitutional retirement and the election of Cavaignac. A section
of the bourgeoisie desired the latter solution and knew no better
advice to give its representatives than to keep silent and leave the
burning question untouched. They were of the opinion that if their
representatives did not speak, Bonaparte would not act. They wanted an
ostrich parliament that would hide its head in order to remain
unseen. Another section of the bourgeoisie desired, because Bonaparte
was already in the presidential chair, to leave him sitting in it, so
that everything could remain in the same old rut. They were indignant
because their parliament did not openly infringe the constitution and
abdicate without ceremony.

The Department Councils, those provincial representative bodies of the
big bourgeoisie, which met from August 25 on during the recess of the
National Assembly, declared almost unanimously for revision, and thus
against parliament and in favor of Bonaparte.

Still more unequivocally than in its falling out with its
parliamentary representatives, the bourgeoisie displayed its wrath
against its literary representatives, its own press. The sentences to
ruinous fines and shameless terms of imprisonment, on the verdicts of
bourgeois juries, for every attack of bourgeois journalists on
Bonaparte's usurpationist desires, for every attempt of the press to
defend the political rights of the bourgeoisie against the executive
power, astonished not merely France, but all Europe.

While the parliamentary party of Order, by its clamor for
tranquillity, as I have shown, committed itself to quiescence, while
it declared the political rule of the bourgeoisie to be incompatible
with the safety and existence of the bourgeoisie -- by destroying with
its own hands, in the struggle against the other classes of society,
all the conditions for its own regime, the parliamentary regime -- the
extraparliamentary mass of the bourgeoisie, on the other hand, by its
servility toward the President, by its vilification of parliament, by
its brutal maltreatment of its own press, invited Bonaparte to
suppress and annihilate its speaking and writing section, its
politicians and its literati, its platform and its press, so it would
then be able to pursue its private affairs with full confidence in the
protection of a strong and unrestricted government. It declared
unequivocally that it longed to get rid of its own political rule in
order to get rid of the troubles and dangers of ruling.

And this extraparliamentary bourgeoisie, which had already rebelled
against the purely parliamentary and literary struggle for the rule of
its own class, and had betrayed the leaders of this struggle, now
dares after the event to indict the proletariat for not having risen
in a bloody struggle, a life-and-death struggle on its behalf! This
bourgeoisie, which every moment sacrificed its general class
interests, that is, its political interests, to the narrowest and most
sordid private interests, and demanded a similar sacrifice from its
representatives, now moans that the proletariat has sacrificed its
ideal political interests to its material interests. It poses as a
lovely creature that has been misunderstood and deserted in the
decisive hour by the proletariat, misled by socialists. And it finds a
general echo in the bourgeois world. Naturally, I do not speak here of
German shyster politicians and riffraff of the same persuasion. I
refer, for example, to the already quoted Economist, which as late as
November 29, 1851, that is, four days prior to the coup d'etat,
declared Bonaparte to be the "guardian of order" but Thiers and
Berryer to be "anarchists," and on December 27, 1851, after Bonaparte
had quieted these "anarchists," is already vociferous about the
treason to "the skill, knowledge, discipline, spiritual insight,
intellectual resources, and moral weight of the middle and upper
ranks" committed by the masses of "ignorant, untrained, and stupid
proletaires." The stupid, ignorant, and vulgar mass was none other
than the bourgeois mass itself.

In the year 1851, France, to be sure, had passed through a kind of
minor trade crisis. The end of February showed a decline in exports
compared with 1850; in March trade suffered and factories closed down;
in April the position of the industrial departments appeared as
desperate as after the February days; in May business had still not
revived; as late as June 28 the holdings of the Bank of France showed,
by the enormous growth of deposits and the equally great decrease in
advances on bills of exchange, that production was at a standstill,
and it was not until the middle of October that a progressive
improvement of business again set in. The French bourgeoisie
attributed this trade stagnation to purely political causes, to the
struggle between parliament and the executive power, to the
precariousncss of a merely provisional form of state, to the
terrifying prospect of the second Sunday in May of 1852. I will not
deny that all these circumstances had a depressing effect on some
branches of industry in Paris and the departments. But in any case the
influence of political conditions was only local and
inconsiderable. Does this require further proof than the fact that the
improvement of trade set in toward the middle of October, at the very
moment when the political situation grew worse, the political horizon
darkened, and a thunderbolt from Elysium was expected at any moment?
For the rest, the French bourgeois, whose "skill, knowledge, spiritual
insight, and intellectual resources" reach no further than his nose,
could throughout the period of the Industrial Exhibition in London
have found the cause of his commercial misery right under his
nose. While in France factories were closed down, in England
commercial bankruptcies broke out. While in April and May the
industrial panic reached a climax in France, in April and May the
commercial panic reached a climax in England. Like the French woolen
industry, the English woolen industry suffered, and as French silk
manufacture, so did English silk manufacture. True, the English cotton
mills continued working, but no longer at the same profits as in 1849
and 1850. The only difference was that the crisis in France was
industrial, in England commercial; that while in France the factories
stood idle, in England they extended operations, but under less
favorable conditions than in preceding years; that in France it was
exports, in England imports which were hardest hit. The common cause,
which is naturally not to be sought within the bounds of the French
political horizon, was obvious. The years 1849 and 1850 were years of
the greatest material prosperity and of an overproduction that
appeared as such only in 1851. At the beginning of this year it was
given a further special impetus by the prospect of the Industrial
Exhibition. In addition there were the following special
circumstances: first, the partial failure of the cotton crop in 1850
and 1851, then the certainty of a bigger cotton crop than had been
expected; first the rise, then the sudden fall-in short, the
fluctuations in the price of cotton. The crop of raw silk, in France
at least, had turned out to be even below the average yield. Woolen
manufacture, finally, had expanded so much since 1848 that the
production of wool could not keep pace with it and the price of raw
wool rose out of all proportion to the price of woolen
manufactures. Here, then, in the raw material of three industries for
the world market, we already have threefold material for a stagnation
in trade. Apart from these special circumstances, the apparent crisis
of 1851 was nothing else but the halt which overproduction and
overspeculation invariably make in completing the industrial cycle,
before they summon all their strength in order to rush feverishly
through the final phase of this cycle and arrive once more at their
starting point, the general trade crisis. During such intervals in the
history of trade, commercial bankruptcies break out in England, while
in France industry itself is reduced to idleness, partly forced into
retreat by the competition, just then becoming intolerable, of the
English in all markets, and partly singled out for attack as a luxury
industry by every business stagnation. Thus besides the general crisis
France goes through national trade crises of her own, which are
nevertheless determined and conditioned far more by the general state
of the world market than by French local influences. It will not be
without interest to contrast the judgment of the English bourgeois
with the prejudice of the French bourgeois. In its annual trade report
for 1851, one of the largest Liverpool houses writes: "Few years have
more thoroughly belied the anticipations formed at their commencement
than the one just closed; instead of the great prosperity which was
almost unanimously looked for it has proved one of the most
discouraging that has been seen for the last quarter of a century --
this, of course, refers to the mercantile, not to the manufacturing
classes. And yet there certainly were grounds for anticipating the
reverse at the beginning of the year -- stocks of produce were
moderate, money was abundant, and food was cheap, a plentiful harvest
well secured, unbroken peace on the Continent, and no political or
fiscal disturbances at home; indeed, the wings of commerce were never
more unfettered.... To what source, then, is this disastrous result to
be attributed? We believe to overtrading in both imports and
exports. Unless our merchants will put more stringent limits to their
freedom of action, nothing but a triennial panic can keep us in
check."

Now picture to yourself the French bourgeois, how in the throes of
this business panic his trade-crazy brain is tortured, set in a whirl,
and stunned by rumors of coups d'etat and the restoration of universal
suffrage, by the struggle between parliament and the executive power,
by the Fronde war between Orleanists and Legitimists, by the communist
conspiracies in the south of France, by alleged Jacqueries in the
departments of Nievre and Cher, by the advertisements of the different
candidates for the presidency, by the cheapjack solutions offered by
the journals, by the threats of the republicans to uphold the
constitution and universal suffrage by force of arms, by the gospel-
preaching emigre heroes in partibus, who announced that the world
would come to an end on the second Sunday in May, 1852 -- think of all
this and you will comprehend why in this unspeakable, deafening chaos
of fusion, revision, prorogation, constitution, conspiration,
coalition, emigration, usurpation, and revolution, the bourgeois madly
snorts at his parliamentary republic: "Rather an end with terror than
terror without end!"

Bonaparte understood this cry. His power of comprehension was
sharpened by the growing turbulence of creditors, who with each sunset
which brought settling day, the second Sunday in May, 1852, nearer,
saw a movement of the stars protesting their earthly bills of
exchange. They had become veritable astrologers. The National Assembly
had blighted Bonaparte's hopes of a constitutional prolongation of his
authority; the candidature of the Prince of Joinville forbade further
vacillation.

If ever an event has, well in advance of its coming, cast its shadow
before, it was Bonaparte's coup d'etat. As early as January 29, 1849,
barely a month after his election, he had made a proposal about it to
Changarnier. In the summer of 1849 his own Prime Minister, Odilon
Barrot, had covertly denounced the policy of coups d'etat; in the
winter of 1 85o Thiers had openly done so. In May, 1851, Persigny had
sought once more to win Changarnier for the coup; the Messager de
I'Assemblee had published an account of these negotiations. During
every parliamentary storm the Bonapartist journals threatened a coup
d'etat, and the nearer the crisis drew, the louder their tone
became. In the orgies that Bonaparte kept up every night with men and
women of the "swell mob," as soon as the hour of midnight approached
and copious potations had loosened tongues and fired imaginations, the
coup d'etat was fixed for the following morning. Swords were drawn,
glasses clinked, the representatives were thrown out the window, the
imperial mantle fell upon Bonaparte's shoulders, until the following
morning banished the ghost once more and astonished Paris learned,
from vestals of little reticence and from indiscreet paladins, of the
danger it had once again escaped. During the months of September and
October rumors of a coup d'etat followed fast, one after the
other. Simultaneously the shadow took on color, like a variegated
daguerreotype. Look up the September and October copies of the organs
of the European daily press and you will find, word for word,
intimations like the following: "Paris is full of rumors of a coup
d'etat. The capital is to be filled with troops during the night, and
the next morning is to bring decrees which will dissolve the National
Assembly, declare the Department of the Seine in a state of siege,
restore universal suffrage, and appeal to the people. Bonaparte is
said to be seeking ministers for the execution of these illegal
decrees." The dispatches that bring these tidings always end with the
fateful word "postponed." The coup d'etat was ever the fixed idea of
Bonaparte. With this idea he had again set foot on French soil. He was
so obsessed by it that he continually betrayed it and blurted it
out. He was so weak that, just as continually, he gave it up
again. The shadow of the coup d'etat had become so familiar to the
Parisians as a specter that they were not willing to believe in it
when it finally appeared in the flesh. What allowed the coup d'etat to
succeed was therefore neither the reticent reserve of the chief of the
Society of December 10 nor the fact that the National Assembly was
caught unawares. If it succeeded, it succeeded despite its
indiscretion and with its foreknowledge, a necessary, inevitable
result of antecedent developments.

On October 10 Bonaparte announced to his ministers his decision to
restore universal suffrage; on the sixteenth they handed in their
resignations; on the twenty-sixth Paris learned of the formation of
the Thorigny Ministry. Police Prefect Carlier was simultaneously
replaced by Maupas; the head of the First Military Division, Magnan,
concentrated the most reliable regiments in the capital. On November 4
the National Assembly resumed its sessions. It had nothing better to
do than to recapitulate in a short, succinct form the course it had
gone through and to prove that it was buried only after it had died.

The first post it forfeited in the struggle with the executive power
was the ministry. It had solemnly to admit this loss by accepting at
full value the Thorigny Ministry, a mere shadow cabinet. The Permanent
Commission had received M. Giraud with laughter when he presented
himself in the name of the new ministers. Such a weak ministry for
such strong measures as the restoration of universal suffrage! Yet the
precise object was to get nothing through in parliament, but
everything against parliament.

On the very first day of its reopening, the National Assembly received
the message from Bonaparte in which he demanded the restoration of
universal suffrage and the abolition of the law of May 3 1, 1 8
So. The same day his ministers introduced a decree to this effect. The
National Assembly at once rejected the ministry's motion of urgency
and rejected the law itself on November i3 by three hundred and
fifty-five votes to three hundred and forty-eight. Thus, it tore up
its mandate once more; it once more confirmed the fact that it had
transformed itself from the freely elected representatives of the
people into the usurpatory parliament of a class; it acknowledged once
more that it had itself cut in two the muscles which connected the
parliamentary head with the body of the nation.

If by its motion to restore universal suffrage the executive power
appealed from the National Assembly to the people, the legislative
power appealed by its Quaestors' Bill from the people to the
army. This Quaestors' Bill was to establish its right of directly
requisitioning troops, of forming a parliamentary army. While it thus
designated the army as the arbitrator between itself and the people,
between itself and Bonaparte, while it recognized the army as the
decisive state power, it had to confirm, on the other hand, the fact
that it had long given up its claim to dominate this power. By
debating its right to requisition troops, instead of requisitioning
them at once, it betrayed its doubts about its own powers. By
rejecting the Quaestors' Bill, it made public confession of its
impotence. This bill was defeated, its proponents lacking a hundred
and eight votes of a majority. The Montagne thus decided the issue. It
found itself in the position of Buridan's ass -- not, indeed, between
two bundles of hay with the problem of deciding which was the more
attractive, but between two showers of blows with the problem of
deciding which was the harder. On the one hand, there was the fear of
Changarnier; on the other, the fear of Bonaparte. It must be confessed
that the position was not a heroic one.

On November 18 an amendment was moved to the law on municipal
elections introduced by the party of Order, to the effect that instead
of three years', one year's domicile should suffice for municipal
electors. The amendment was lost by a single vote, but this one vote
immediately proved to be a mistake. By splitting up into its hostile
factions, the party of Order had long ago forfeited its independent
parliamentary majority. It showed now that there was no longer any
majority at all in parliament. The National Assembly had become
incapable of transacting business. Its atomic constituents were no
longer held together by any force of cohesion; it had drawn its last
breath; it was dead.

Finally, a few days before the catastrophe, the extraparliamentary
mass of the bourgeoisie was solemnly to confirm once more its breach
with the bourgeoisie in parliament. Thiers, as a parliamentary hero
infected more than the rest with the incurable disease of
parliamentary cretinism, had, after the death of parliament, hatched
out, together with the Council of State, a new parliamentary intrigue,
a Responsibility Law by which the President was to be firmly held
within the limits of the constitution. just as, on laying the
foundation stone of the new market halls in Paris on September 15,
Bonaparte, like a second Masaniello, had enchanted the dames des
balles, the fishwives -- to be sure, one fishwife outweighed seventeen
burgraves in real power -- just as after the introduction of the
Quaestors' Bill he enraptured the lieutenants whom he regaled in the
Elysee, so now, on November 25, he swept off their feet the industrial
bourgeoisie, which had gathered at the circus to receive at his hands
prize medals for the London Industrial Exhibition.

I shall give the significant portion of his speech as reported in the
journal des Debats: "'With such unhoped-for successes, I am justified
in reiterating how great the French Republic would be if it were
permitted to pursue its real interests and reform its institutions,
instead of being constantly disturbed by demagogues, on the one hand,
and by monarchist hallucinations, on the other.' (Loud, stormy and
repeated applause from every part of the amphitheater.) 'The
monarchist hallucinations hinder all progress and all important
branches of industry. In place of progress nothing but struggle. One
sees men who were formerly the most zealous supporters of the royal
authority and prerogative become partisans of a Convention merely in
order to weaken the authority that has sprung from universal
suffrage.' (Loud and repeated applause.) 'We see men who have suffered
most from the Revolution, and have deplored it most, provoke a new
one, and merely in order to fetter the nation's will.... I promise you
tranquillity for the future,' etc., etc. (Bravo, bravo, a storm of
bravos.) "

Thus the industrial bourgeoisie applauds with servile bravos the coup
d'etat of December 2, the annihilation of parliament, the downfall of
its own rule, the dictatorship of Bonaparte. The thunder of applause
on November 25 had its answer in the thunder of cannon on December 4,
and it was on the house of Monsieur Sallandrouze, who had clapped
most, that they clapped most of the bombs.

Cromwell, when he dissolved the Long Parliament, went alone into its
midst, took out his watch so that it should not continue to exist a
minute after the time limit he had fixed, and drove out each one of
the members of Parliament with hilariously humorous taunts. Napoleon,
smaller than his prototype, at least betook himself on the eighteenth
Brumaire to the legislative body and read out to it, though in a
faltering voice, its sentence of death. The second Bonaparte, who,
moreover, found himself in possession of an executive power very
different from that of Cromwell or Napoleon, sought his model not in
the annals of world history but in the annals of the Society of
December 1 o, in the annals of the criminal courts. He robs the Bank
of France of twenty-five million francs, buys General Magnan with a
million, the soldiers with fifteen francs apiece and liquor, comes
together with his accomplices secretly like a thief in the night, has
the houses of the most dangerous parliamentary leaders broken into,
and Cavaignac, Lamoriciere, Le Flo, Changarnier, Charras, Thiers,
Baze, etc., dragged from their beds and put in prison, the chief
squares of Paris and the parliamentary building occupied by troops,
and cheapjack placards posted early in the morning on all the walls,
proclaiming the dissolution of the National Assembly and the Council
of State, the restoration of universal suffrage, and the placing of
the Seine Department in a state of siege. In like manner he inserted a
little later in the Moniteur a false document which asserted that
influential parliamentarians had grouped themselves around him and
formed a state consulta.

The rump parliament, assembled in the mairie building of the Tenth
Arrondissement and consisting mainly of Legitimists and Orleanists,
votes the deposition of Bonaparte amid repeated cries of "Long live
the Republic," unfailingly harangues the gaping crowds before the
building, and is finally led off in the custody of African
sharpshooters, first to the d'Orsay barracks, and later packed into
prison vans and transported to the prisons of Mazas, Ham, and
Vincennes. Thus ended the party of Order, the Legislative Assembly,
and the February Revolution. Before hastening to close, let us briefly
summarize the latter's history:

1. First period. From February 24 to May 4, 1 848. February
period. Prologue. Universal-brotherhood swindle.

2. Second period. Period of constituting the republic and of the
Constituent National Assembly.

a. May 4 to June 25, 1848- Struggle of all classes against the
proletariat. Defeat of the proletariat in the June days.

b. June 25 to December 10, 1848. Dictatorship of the pure bourgeois
republicans. Drafting of the constitution. Proclamation of a state of
siege in Paris. The bourgeois dictatorship set aside on December 10 by
the election of Bonaparte as President.

c. December 20, 1848, to May 28, 1849- Struggle of the Constituent
Assembly with Bonaparte and with the party of Order in alliance with
him. Passing of the Constituent Assembly. Fall of the republican
bourgeoisie.

3. Third period. Period of the constitutional republic and of the
Legislative National Assembly.

a. May 28, 1849, to June 13, 1849- Struggle of the petty bourgeoisie
with the bourgeoisie and with Bonaparte. Defeat of the petty-bourgeois
democracy.

b. June 13, 1849, to May 31, 1850. Parliamentary dictatorship of the
party of Order. It completes its rule by abolishing universal
suffrage, but loses the parliamentary ministry.

c. May 31, 1850, to December 2, 1851. Struggle between the
parliamentary bourgeoisie and Bonaparte.

(1) May 31, 1850, to January 12, 1851. The Assembly loses the supreme
command of the army.

(2) January 12 to April 11, 1851. It is worsted in its attempts to
regain the administrative power. The party of Order loses its
independent parliamentary majority. It forms a coalition with the
republicans and the Montagne.

(3) April 11, 1851, to October 9, 1851. Attempts at revision, fusion,
prorogation. The party of Order decomposes into its separate
constituents. The breach between the bourgeois parliament and press
and the mass of the bourgeoisie becomes definite.

(4) October 9 to December 2, 1851. Open breach between parliament and
the executive power. The Assembly performs its dying act and succumbs,
left in the lurch by its own class, by the army, and by all the
remaining classes. Passing of the parliamentary regime and of
bourgeois rule. Victory of Bonaparte. Parody of restoration of empire.

VII

The social republic appeared as a phrase, as a prophecy, on the
threshold of the February Revolution. In the June days of 1848, it was
drowned in the blood of the Paris proletariat, but it haunts the
subsequent acts of the drama like a ghost. The democratic republic
announces its appearance. It is dissipated on June 13, 1849, together
with its deserting petty bourgeois, but in its flight it redoubles its
boastfulness. The parliamentary republic together with the bourgeoisie
takes possession of the entire state; it enjoys its existence to the
full, but December 2, 1851, buries it to the accompaniment of the
anguished cry of the coalesced royalists: "Long live the Republic!"

The French bourgeoisie balked at the domination of the working
proletariat; it has brought the lumpen proletariat to domination, with
the Chief of the Society of December 10 at the head. The bourgeoisie
kept France in breathless fear of the future terrors of red anarchy-
Bonaparte discounted this future for it when, on December 4, he had
the eminent bourgeois of the Boulevard Montmartre and the Boulevard
des Italiens shot down at their windows by the drunken army of law and
order. The bourgeoisie apotheosized the sword; the sword rules it. It
destroyed the revolutionary press; its own press is destroyed. It
placed popular meetings under police surveillance; its salons are
placed under police supervision. It disbanded the democratic National
Guard, its own National Guard is disbanded. It imposed a state of
siege; a state of siege is imposed upon it. It supplanted the juries
by military commissions; its juries are supplanted by military
commissions. It subjected public education to the sway of the priests;
the priests subject it to their own education. It jailed people
without trial, it is being jailed without trial. It suppressed every
stirring in society by means of state power; every stirring in its
society is suppressed by means of state power. Out of enthusiasm for
its moneybags it rebelled against its own politicians and literary
men; its politicians and literary men are swept aside, but its
moneybag is being plundered now that its mouth has been gagged and its
pen broken. The bourgeoisie never tired of crying out to the
revolution what St. Arsenius cried out to the Christians: "Fuge, tace,
quiesce!" ["Flee, be silent, keep still!"] Bonaparte cries to the
bourgeoisie: "Fuge, tace, quiesce!"

The French bourgeoisie had long ago found the solution to Napoleon's
dilemma: "In fifty years Europe will be republican or Cossack." It
solved it in the "Cossack republic." No Circe using black magic has
distorted that work of art, the bourgeois republic, into a monstrous
shape. That republic has lost nothing but the semblance of
respectability. Present-day France was already contained in the
parliamentary republic. It required only a bayonet thrust for the
bubble to burst and the monster to leap forth before our eyes.

Why did the Paris proletariat not rise in revolt after December 2?

The overthrow of the bourgeoisie had as yet been only decreed; the
decree was not carried out. Any serious insurrection of the
proletariat would at once have put new life into the bourgeoisie,
reconciled it with the army, and insured a second June defeat for the
workers.

On December 4 the proletariat was incited by bourgeois and shopkeeper
to fight. On the evening of that day several legions of the National
Guard promised to appear, armed and uniformed, on the scene of
battle. For the bourgeois and the shopkeeper had learned that in one
of his decrees of December 2 Bonaparte had abolished the secret ballot
and had ordered them to put a "yes" or "no" after their names on the
official registers. The resistance of December 4 intimidated
Bonaparte. During the night he had placards posted on all the street
corners of Paris announcing the restoration of the secret ballot. The
bourgeois and the shopkeeper believed they had gained their
objective. Those who failed to appear next morning were the bourgeois
and the shopkeeper.

By a coup de main the night of December 1-2 Bonaparte had robbed the
Paris proletariat of its leaders, the barricade commanders. An army
without officers, averse to fighting under the banner of the
Montagnards because of the memories of June, 1848 and 1849, and May,
1850, it left to its vanguard, the secret societies, the task of
saving the insurrectionary honor of Paris, which the bourgeoisie had
surrendered to the military so unresistingly that, subsequently,
Bonaparte could disarm the National Guard with the sneering motive of
his fear that its weapons would be turned against it by the
anarchists!

"This is the complete and final triumph of socialism!" Thus Guizot
characterized December 2. But if the overthrow of the parliamentary
republic contains within itself the germ of the triumph of the
proletarian revolution, its immediate and obvious result was
Bonaparte's victory over parliament, of the executive power over the
legislative power, of force without phrases over the force of
phrases. In parliament the nation made its general will the law; that
is, it made the law of the ruling class its general will. It renounces
all will of its own before the executive power and submits itself to
the superior command of an alien, of authority. The executive power,
in contrast to the legislative one, expresses the heteronomy of a
nation in contrast to its autonomy. France therefore seems to have
escaped the despotism of a class only to under the despotism of an
individual, and what is more, under the authority of an individual
without authority. The struggle seems to be settled in such a way that
all classes, equally powerless and equally mute, fall on their knees
before the rifle butt.

But the revolution is thoroughgoing. It is still traveling through
purgatory. It does its work methodically. By December 2, 1851, it had
completed half of its preparatory work; now it is completing the other
half. It first completed the parliamentary power in order to be able
to overthrow it. Now that it has achieved this, it completes the
executive power, reduces it to its purest expression, isolates it,
sets it up against itself as the sole target, in order to concentrate
all its forces of destruction against it. And when it has accomplished
this second half of its preliminary work, Europe will leap from its
seat and exult: Well burrowed, old mole! [A paraphrase from
Shakespeare's Hamlet, Act 1, Scene 5: "Well said, old mole!" -- Ed.]

The executive power with its enormous bureaucratic and military
organization, with its wide-ranging and ingenious state machinery,
with a host of officials numbering half a million, besides an army of
another half million-this terrifying parasitic body which enmeshes the
body of French society and chokes all its pores sprang up in the time
of the absolute monarchy, with the decay of the feudal system which it
had helped to hasten. The seignorial privileges of the landowners and
towns became transformed into so many attributes of the state power,
the feudal dignitaries into paid officials, and the motley patterns of
conflicting medieval plenary powers into the regulated plan of a state
authority whose work is divided and centralized as in a factory.

The first French Revolution, with its task of breaking all separate
local, territorial, urban, and provincial powers in order to create
the civil unity of the nation, was bound to develop what the monarchy
had begun, centralization, but at the same time the limits, the
attributes, and the agents of the governmental power. Napoleon
completed this state machinery. The Legitimate Monarchy and the July
Monarchy added nothing to it but a greater division of labor,
increasing at the same rate as the division of labor inside the
bourgeois society created new groups of interests, and therefore new
material for the state administration. Every common interest was
immediately severed from the society, countered by a higher, general
interest, snatched from the activities of society's members themselves
and made an object of government activity -- from a bridge, a
schoolhouse, and the communal property of a village community, to the
railroads, the national wealth, and the national University of
France. Finally the parliamentary republic, in its struggle against
the revolution, found itself compelled to strengthen the means and the
centralization of governmental power with repressive measures. All
revolutions perfected this machine instead of breaking it. The
parties, which alternately contended for domination, regarded the
possession of this huge state structure as the chief spoils of the
victor.

But under the absolute monarchy, during the first Revolution, and
under Napoleon the bureaucracy was only the means of preparing the
class rule of the bourgeoisie. Under the Restoration, under Louis
Philippe, under the parliamentary republic, it was the instrument of
the ruling class, however much it strove for power of its own.

Only under the second Bonaparte does the state seem to have made
itself completely independent. The state machinery has so strengthened
itself vis-...-vis civil society that the Chief of the Society of
December 10 suffices for its head -- an adventurer dropped in from
abroad, raised on the shoulders of a drunken soldiery which he bought
with whisky and sausages and to which he has to keep throwing more
sausages. Hence the low-spirited despair, the feeling of monstrous
humiliation and degradation that oppresses the breast of France and
makes her gasp. She feels dishonored.

And yet the state power is not suspended in the air. Bonaparte
represented a class, and the most numerous class of French society at
that, the small-holding peasants.

Just as the Bourbons were the dynasty of the big landed property and
the Orleans the dynasty of money, so the Bonapartes are the dynasty of
the peasants, that is, the French masses. The chosen of the peasantry
is not the Bonaparte who submitted to the bourgeois parliament but the
Bonaparte who dismissed the bourgeois parliament. For three years the
towns had succeeded in falsifying the meaning of the December 10
election and in cheating the peasants out of the restoration of the
Empire. The election of December 10, 1848, has been consummated only
by the coup d'etat of December 2, 1851.

The small-holding peasants form an enormous mass whose members live in
similar conditions but without entering into manifold relations with
each other. Their mode of production isolates them from one another
instead of bringing them into mutual intercourse. The isolation is
furthered by France's poor means of communication and the poverty of
the peasants. Their field of production, the small holding, permits no
division of labor in its cultivation, no application of science, and
therefore no multifariousness of development, no diversity of talent,
no wealth of social relationships. Each individual peasant family is
almost self-sufficient, directly produces most of its consumer needs,
and thus acquires its means of life more through an exchange with
nature than in intercourse with society. A small holding, the peasant
and his family; beside it another small holding, another peasant and
another family. A few score of these constitute a village, and a few
score villages constitute a department. Thus the great mass of the
French nation is formed by the simple addition of homonymous
magnitudes, much as potatoes in a sack form a sack of
potatoes. Insofar as millions of families live under conditions of
existence that separate their mode of life, their interests, and their
culture from those of the other classes, and put them in hostile
opposition to the latter, they form a class. Insofar as there is
merely a local interconnection among these small-holding peasants, and
the identity of their interests forms no community, no national bond,
and no political organization among them, they do not constitute a
class. They are therefore incapable of asserting their class interest
in their own name, whether through a parliament or a convention. They
cannot represent themselves, they must be represented. Their
representative must at the same time appear as their master, as an
authority over them, an unlimited governmental power which protects
them from the other classes and sends them rain and sunshine from
above. The political influence of the small-holding peasants,
therefore, finds its final expression in the executive power which
subordinates society to itself.

Historical tradition gave rise to the French peasants' belief in the
miracle that a man named Napoleon would bring all glory back to
them. And there turned up an individual who claims to be that man
because he bears the name Napoleon, in consequence of the Code
Napoleon, which decrees: "Inquiry into paternity is forbidden." After
a twenty-year vagabondage and a series of grotesque adventures the
legend is consummated, and the man becomes Emperor of the French. The
idee fixe of the nephew was realized because it coincided with the
idee fixe of the most numerous class of the French people.

But, it may be objected, what about the peasant uprisings in half of
France, the raids of the army on the peasants, the mass incarceration
and transportation of the peasants?

Since Louis XIV, France has experienced no similar persecution of the
peasants "on account of demagogic agitation."

But let us not misunderstand. The Bonaparte dynasty represents not the
revolutionary, but the conservative peasant; not the peasant who
strikes out beyond the condition of his social existence, the small
holding, but rather one who wants to consolidate his holding; not the
countryfolk who in alliance with the towns want to overthrow the old
order through their own energies, but on the contrary those who, in
solid seclusion within this old order, want to see themselves and
their small holdings saved and favored by the ghost of the Empire. It
represents not the enlightenment but the superstition of the peasant;
not his judgment but his prejudice; not his future but his past; not
his modern Cevennes [A peasant uprising in the Cevennes mountains in
1702-1705. -- Ed.] but his modern Vendee. [A peasant-backed uprising
against the French Revolution in the French province of Vendee, in
1793. -- Ed.]

The three years' stern rule of the parliamentary republic freed a part
of the French peasants from the Napoleonic illusion and revolutionized
them, even though superficially; but the bourgeoisie violently
repulsed them as often as they set themselves in motion. Under the
parliamentary republic the modern and the traditional consciousness of
the French peasant contended for mastery. The process took the form of
an incessant struggle between the schoolmasters and the priests. The
bourgeoisie struck down the schoolmasters. The peasants for the first
time made efforts to behave independently vis-...-vis the
government. This was shown in the continual conflict between the
mayors and the prefects. The bourgeoisie deposed the mayors. Finally,
during the period of the parliamentary republic, the peasants of
different localities rose against their own offspring, the army. The
bourgeoisie punished these peasants with sieges and executions. And
this same bourgeoisie now cries out against the stupidity of the
masses, the vile multitude that betrayed it to Bonaparte. The
bourgeoisie itself has violently strengthened the imperialism of the
peasant class; it has preserved the conditions that form the
birthplaces of this species of peasant religion. The bourgeoisie, in
truth, is bound to fear the stupidity of the masses so long as they
remain conservative, and the insight of the masses as soon as they
become revolutionary.

In the uprisings after the coup d'etat, a part of the French peasants
protested, arms in hand, against their own vote of December 10,
1848. The school they had gone to since 1848 had sharpened their
wits. But they had inscribed themselves in the historical underworld;
history held them to their word, and the majority was still so
implicated that precisely in the reddest departments the peasant
population voted openly for Bonaparte. In their view, the National
Assembly had hindered his progress. He has now merely broken the
fetters that the towns had imposed on the will of the countryside. In
some parts the peasants even entertained the grotesque notion of a
convention with Napoleon.

After the first Revolution had transformed the semi-feudal peasants
into freeholders, Napoleon confirmed and regulated the conditions in
which they could exploit undisturbed the soil of France which they had
only just acquired, and could slake their youthful passion for
property. But what is now ruining the French peasant is his small
holding itself, the division of the land and the soil, the property
form which Napoleon consolidated in France. It is exactly these
material conditions which made the feudal peasant a small-holding
peasant and Napoleon an emperor. Two generations sufficed to produce
the unavoidable result: progressive deterioration of agriculture and
progressive indebtedness of the agriculturist. The "Napoleonic"
property form, which at the beginning of the nineteenth century was
the condition of the emancipation and enrichment of the French
countryfolk, has developed in the course of this century into the law
of their enslavement and their pauperism. And just this law is the
first of the "Napoleonic ideas" which the second Bonaparte has to
uphold. If he still shares with the peasants the illusion that the
cause of their ruin is to be sought not in the small holdings
themselves but outside them -- in the influence of secondary
circumstances -- his experiments will shatter like soap bubbles when
they come in contact with the relations of production.

The economic development of small-holding property has radically
changed the peasants' relations with the other social classes. Under
Napoleon the fragmentation of the land in the countryside supplemented
free competition and the beginning of big industry in the towns. The
peasant class was the ubiquitous protest against the recently
overthrown landed aristocracy. The roots that small-holding property
struck in French soil deprived feudalism of all nourishment. The
landmarks of this property formed the natural fortification of the
bourgeoisie against any surprise attack by its old overlords. But in
the course of the nineteenth century the urban usurer replaced the
feudal one, the mortgage replaced the feudal obligation, bourgeois
capital replaced aristocratic landed property. The peasant's small
holding is now only the pretext that allows the capitalist to draw
profits, interest, and rent from the soil, while leaving it to the
agriculturist himself to see to it how he can extract his wages. The
mortgage debt burdening the soil of France imposes on the French
peasantry an amount of interest equal to the annual interest on the
entire British national debt. Small-holding property, in this
enslavement by capital toward which its development pushes it
unavoidably, has transformed the mass of the French nation into
troglodytes. Sixteen million peasants (including women and children)
dwell in caves, a large number of which have but one opening, others
only two and the most favored only three. Windows are to a house what
the five senses are to the head. The bourgeois order, which at the
beginning of the century set the state to stand guard over the newly
emerged small holdings and fertilized them with laurels, has become a
vampire that sucks the blood from their hearts and brains and casts
them into the alchemist's caldron of capital. The Code Napoleon is now
nothing but the codex of distraints, of forced sales and compulsory
auctions. To the four million (including children, etc.) officially
recognized paupers, vagabonds, criminals, and prostitutes in France
must be added another five million who hover on the margin of
existence and either have their haunts in the countryside itself or,
with their rags and their children, continually desert the countryside
for the towns and the towns for the countryside. Therefore the
interests of the peasants are no longer, as under Napoleon, in accord
with, but are now in opposition to bourgeois interests, to
capital. Hence they find their natural ally and leader in the urban
proletariat, whose task it is to overthrow the bourgeois order. But
"strong and unlimited government" -- and this is the second
"Napoleonic idea" that the second Napoleon has to carry out -- is
called upon to defend this "material order" by force. This "material
order" also serves, in all Bonaparte's proclamations, as the slogan
against the rebellious peasants.

In addition to the mortgage which capital imposes on it, the small
holding is burdened by taxes. Taxes are the life source of the
bureaucracy, the army, the priests, and the court -- in short, of the
entire apparatus of the executive power. Strong government and heavy
taxes are identical. By its very nature, small- holding property forms
a basis for an all-powerful and numberless bureaucracy. It creates a
uniform level of personal and economic relationships over the whole
extent of the country. Hence it also permits uniform action from a
supreme center on all points of this uniform mass. It destroys the
aristocratic intermediate steps between the mass of the people and the
power of the state. On all sides, therefore, it calls forth the direct
intrusion of this state power and the interposition of its immediate
organs. Finally, it produces an unemployed surplus population which
can find no place either on the land or in the towns and which
perforce reaches out for state offices as a sort of respectable alms,
and provokes the creation of additional state positions. By the new
markets which he opened with bayonets, and by the plundering of the
Continent, Napoleon repaid the compulsory taxes with interest. These
taxes were a spur to the industry of the peasant, whereas now they rob
his industry of its last resources and complete his defenselessness
against pauperism. An enormous bureaucracy, well gallooned and well
fed, is the "Napoleonic idea" which is most congenial to the second
Bonaparte. How could it be otherwise, considering that alongside the
actual classes of society, he is forced to create an artificial caste
for which the maintenance of his regime becomes a bread-and-butter
question? Hence one of his first financial operations was the raising
of officials' salaries to their old level and the creation of new
sinecures.

Another "Napoleonic idea" is the domination of the priests as an
instrument of government. But while at the time of their emergence the
small-holding owners, in their accord with society, in their
dependence on natural forces and submission to the authority which
protected them from above, were naturally religious, now that they are
ruined by debts, at odds with society and authority, and driven beyond
their own limitations, they have become naturally irreligious.

Heaven was quite a pleasing addition to the narrow strip of land just
won, especially as it makes the weather; it becomes an insult as soon
as it is thrust forward as a substitute for the small holding. The
priest then appears as only the anointed bloodhound of the earthly
police -- another "Napoleonic idea." The expedition against Rome will
take place in France itself next time, but in a sense opposite from
that of M. de Montalembcrt.

Finally, the culminating "Napoleonic idea" is the ascendancy of the
army. The army was the "point of honor" of the small-holding peasants,
it was they themselves transformed into heroes, defending their new
possessions against the outer world, glorifying their recently won
nationhood, plundering and revolutionizing the world. The uniform was
their own state costume; war was their poetry; the small holding,
enlarged and rounded off in imagination, was their fatherland, and
patriotism the ideal form of the sense of property. But the enemies
whom the French peasant now has to defend his property against are not
the Cossacks; they are the huissiers [bailiffs] and the tax
collectors. The small holding no longer lies in the so-called
fatherland but in the registry of mortgages. The army itself is no
longer the flower of the peasant youth; it is the swamp flower of the
peasant lumpen proletariat. It consists largely of replacements, of
substitutes, just as the second Bonaparte is himself only a
replacement, the substitute for Napoleon. It now performs its deeds of
valor by hounding the peasants in masses like chamois, by doing
gendarme duty; and if the natural contradictions of his system chase
the Chief of the Society of December 10 across the French border, his
army, after some acts of brigandage, will reap, not laurels, but
thrashings.

It is clear: All "Napoleonic ideas" are ideas of the undeveloped small
holding in the freshness of its youth; they are a contradiction to the
outlived holdings. They are only the hallucinations of its death
struggle, words transformed into phrases, spirits transformed into
ghosts. But the parody of imperialism was necessary to free the mass
of the French nation from the weight of tradition and to work out in
pure form the opposition between state power and society. With the
progressive deterioration of small-holding property, the state
structure erected upon it collapses. The centralization of the state
that modern society requires arises only on the ruins of the
military-bureaucratic government machinery which was forged in
opposition to feudalism.

The condition of the French peasants provides us with the answer to
the riddle of the general elections of December 2o and 2 1, which bore
the second Bonaparte up Mount Sinai, not to receive laws but to give
them.

Obviously the bourgeoisie now had no choice but to elect
Bonaparte. When the Puritans of the Council of Constance [1414-18]
complained of the dissolute lives of the popes and wailed about the
necessity for moral reform, Cardinal Pierre d'Ailly thundered at them:
"Only the devil in person can still save the Catholic Church, and you
ask for angels." Similarly, after the coup d'etat the French
bourgeoisie cried out: Only the Chief of the Society of December 10
can still save bourgeois society! Only theft can still save property;
only perjury, religion; bastardy, the family; disorder, order!

As the executive authority which has made itself independent,
Bonaparte feels it to be his task to safeguard "bourgeois order." But
the strength of this bourgeois order lies in the middle class. He
poses, therefore, as the representative of the middle class and issues
decrees in this sense. Nevertheless, he is somebody solely because he
has broken the power of that middle class, and keeps on breaking it
daily. He poses, therefore, as the opponent of the political and
literary power of the middle class. But by protecting its material
power he revives its political power. Thus the cause must be kept
alive, but the effect, where it manifests itself, must be done away
with. But this cannot happen without small confusions of cause and
effect, since in their interaction both lose their distinguishing
marks. New decrees obliterate the border line. Bonaparte knows how to
pose at ,.he same time as the representative of the peasants and of
the people in general, as a man who wants to make the lower classes
happy within the framework of bourgeois society. New decrees cheat the
"true socialists" of their governmental skill in advance. But above
all, Bonaparte knows how to pose as the Chief of the Society of
December 10, as the representative of the lumpen proletariat to which
he himself, his entourage, his government, and his army belong, and
whose main object is to benefit itself and draw California lottery
prizes from the state treasury. And he confirms himself as Chief of
the Society of December 10 with decrees, without decrees, and despite
decrees.

This contradictory task of the man explains the contradictions of his
government, the confused groping which tries now to win, now to
humiliate, first one class and then another, and uniformly arrays all
of them against him; whose uncertainty in practice forms a highly
comical contrast to the imperious, categorical style of the government
decrees, a style slavishly copied from the uncle.

Industry and commerce, hence the business affairs of the middle class,
are to prosper in hothouse fashion under the strong government: the
grant of innumerable railroad concessions. But the Bonapartist lumpen
proletariat is to enrich itself: those in the know play tripotage
[underhand dealings] on the Exchange with the railroad
concessions. But no capital is forthcoming for the railroads:
obligation of the Bank to make advances on railroad shares. But at the
same time the Bank is to be exploited for personal gain and therefore
must be cajoled: release the Bank from the obligation to publish its
report weekly; leonine [From Aesop's fable about the lion who made a
contract in which one partner got all the profits and the other all
the disadvantages. -- Ed.] agreement of the Bank with the
government. The people are to be given employment: initiation of
public works. But the public works increase the people's tax
obligations: hence reduction of taxes by an attack on the rentiers, by
conversion of the 5-percent bonds into 4 1/2-percent. But the middle
class must again receive a sweetening: hence a doubling of the wine
tax for the people, who buy wine retail, and a halving of the wine tax
for the middle class, which drinks it wholesale; dissolution of the
actual workers' associations, but promises of miraculous future
associations. The peasants are to be helped: mortgage banks which
hasten their indebtedness and accelerate the concentration of
property. But these banks are to be used to make money out of the
confiscated estates of the House of Orleans; no capitalist wants to
agree to this condition, which is not in the decree, and the mortgage
bank remains a mere decree, etc., etc.

Bonaparte would like to appear as the patriarchal benefactor of all
classes. But he cannot give to one without taking from another. just
as it was said of the Duke de Guise in the time of the Fronde that he
was the most obliging man in France because he gave all his estates to
his followers, with feudal obligations to him, so Bonaparte would like
to be the most obliging man in France and turn all the property and
all the labor of France into a personal obligation to himself. He
would like to steal all of France in order to make a present of it to
France, or rather in order to buy France anew with French money, for
as the Chief of the Society of December 10 he must buy what ought to
belong to him. And to the Institution of Purchase belong all the state
institutions, the Senate, the Council of State, the Assembly, the
Legion of Honor, the military medals, the public laundries, the public
works, the railroads, the general staff, the officers of the National
Guard, the confiscated estates of the House of Orleans. The means of
purchase is obtained by selling every place in the army and the
government machinery. But the most important feature of this process,
by which France is taken in order to give to her, are the percentages
that find their way into the pockets of the head and the members of
the Society of December 10 during the turnover. The witticism with
which Countess L., the mistress of M. de Morny, characterized the
confiscation of the Orleans estates -- "It is the first vol [the word
means both "flight" and "theft"] of the eagle" -- is applicable to
every flight of this eagle, who is more like a raven. He and his
follower; call out to one another like that Italian Carthusian
admonishing the miser who ostentatiously counted the goods on which he
could still live for years: "Tu fai conto sopra 1 beni, bisogna prima
far il conto sopra gli anni" ["Thou countest thy goods, thou shouldst
first count thy years"]. In order not to make a mistake in the years,
they count the minutes. At the court, in the ministries, at the head
of the administration and the army, a gang of blokes of whom the best
that can be said is that one does not know whence they come -- these
noisy, disreputable, rapacious bohemians who crawl into gallooned
coats with the same grotesque dignity as the high dignitaries of
Soulouque -- elbow their way forward. One can visualize clearly this
upper stratum of the Society of December 10 if one reflects that
Veron-Crevel [A dissolute philistine character in Balzac's novel
Cousin Bette. -- Ed.] is its preacher of morals and Granier de
Cassagnac its thinker. When Guizot, at the time of his ministry,
turned this Granier of an obscure newspaper into a dynastic opponent,
he used to boast of him with the quip: "C'est le roi des droles" ["He
is the king of buffoons"]. It would be wrong to recall either the
Regency or Louis XV in connection with Louis Bonaparte's court and
clique. For "often before France has experienced a government of
mistresses, but never before a government of kept men." [Quoted from
Mme. de Girardin. -- Note by Karl Marx.]

Driven by the contradictory demands of his situation, and being at the
same time, like a juggler, under the necessity of keeping the public
gaze on himself, as Napoleon's successor, by springing constant
surprises -- that is to say, under the necessity of arranging a coup
d'etat in miniature every day -- Bonaparte throws the whole bourgeois
economy into confusion, violates everything that seemed inviolable to
the Revolution of 1848, makes some tolerant of revolution and makes
others lust for it, and produces anarchy in the name of order, while
at the same time stripping the entire state machinery of its halo,
profaning it and making it at once loathsome and ridiculous. The cult
of the Holy Tunic of Trier [A Catholic relic, allegedly taken from
Christ when he was dying, preserved in the cathedral of Marx's native
city -- Ed.] he duplicates in Paris in the cult of the Napoleonic
imperial mantle. But when the imperial mantle finally falls on the
shoulders of Louis Bonaparte, the bronze statue of Napoleon will come
crashing down from the top of the Vendome Column.