![image](images/00001.jpeg)

 

The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you for your
personal use only. You may not make this e-book publicly available in
any way. Copyright infringement is against the law. If you believe the
copy of this e-book you are reading infringes on the author’s copyright,
please notify the publisher at:
[us.macmillanusa.com/piracy](http://us.macmillanusa.com/piracy).

Contents

[Title Page](#part0000.html#tit)

[Copyright Notice](#part0001.html#notice)

[Dedication](#part0003.html#ded)

[Epigraph](#part0004.html#epig)

[Key to Abbreviations](#part0005.html#abb)

[Author’s Note](#part0006.html#authnote)

1. [The Dialectic of Sex](#part0007.html#ch1)

2. [On American Feminism](#part0008.html#ch2)

3. [Freudianism: The Misguided Feminism](#part0009.html#ch3)

4. [Down with Childhood](#part0010.html#ch4)

5. [Racism: The Sexism of the Family of Man](#part0011.html#ch5)

6. [Love](#part0012.html#ch6)

7. [The Culture of Romance](#part0013.html#ch7)

8. [(Male) Culture](#part0014.html#ch8)

9. [Dialectics of Cultural History](#part0015.html#ch9)

10. [The Ultimate Revolution: Demands and
Speculations](#part0016.html#ch10)

[Notes](#part0017.html#note)

[Praise for The Dialectic of Sex](#part0018.html#praise)

[About the Author](#part0019.html#abt)

[Copyright](#part0020.html#cpy)

 

for

Simone de Beauvoir

who endured

 

When we consider and reflect upon Nature at large or the history of
mankind or our own intellectual activity at first we see the picture of
an endless entanglement of relations and reactions, permutations and
combinations, in which nothing remains what, where, and as it was, but
everything moves, changes, comes into being and passes away. We see
therefore at first the picture as a whole with its individual parts
still more or less kept in the background; we observe the movements,
transitions, connections, rather than the things that move, combine, and
are connected. This primitive, naive, but intrinsically correct
conception of the world is that of ancient Greek philosophy, and was
first clearly formulated by Heraclitus: everything is and is not, for
everything is fluid, is constantly changing, constantly coming into
being and passing away.

FRIEDRICH ENGELS

Key to Abbreviations

[TABLE]

 

The author would like to note that this book remains unabridged and
unrevised since its original publication in 1970.

1 The Dialectic of Sex

Sex class is so deep as to be invisible. Or it may appear as a
superficial inequality, one that can be solved by merely a few reforms,
or perhaps by the full integration of women into the labour force. But
the reaction of the common man, woman, and child – ‘That? Why you can’t
change that! You must be out of your mind!’ – is the closest to the
truth. We are talking about something every bit as deep as that. This
gut reaction – the assumption that, even when they don’t know it,
feminists are talking about changing a fundamental biological condition
– is an honest one. That so profound a change cannot be easily fitted
into traditional categories of thought, e.g., ‘political’, is not
because these categories do not apply but because they are not big
enough: radical feminism bursts through them. If there were another word
more all-embracing than revolution we would use it.

Until a certain level of evolution had been reached and technology had
achieved its present sophistication, to question fundamental biological
conditions was insanity. Why should a woman give up her precious seat in
the cattle car for a bloody struggle she could not hope to win? But, for
the first time in some countries, the preconditions for feminist
revolution exist – indeed, the situation is beginning to demand such a
revolution.

The first women are fleeing the massacre, and, shaking and tottering,
are beginning to find each other. Their first move is a careful joint
observation, to resensitize a fractured consciousness. This is painful:
no matter how many levels of consciousness one reaches, the problem
always goes deeper. It is everywhere. The division yin and yang pervades
all culture, history, economics, nature itself; modern Western versions
of sex discrimination are only the most recent layer. To so heighten
one’s sensitivity to sexism presents problems far worse than the black
militant’s new awareness of racism: feminists have to question, not just
all of Western culture, but the organization of culture itself, and
further, even the very organization of nature. Many women give up in
despair: if that’s how deep it goes they don’t want to know. Others
continue strengthening and enlarging the movement, their painful
sensitivity to female oppression existing for a purpose: eventually to
eliminate it.

Before we can act to change a situation, however, we must know how it
has arisen and evolved, and through what institutions it now operates.
Engels’s ‘\[We must\] examine the historic succession of events from
which the antagonism has sprung in order to discover in the conditions
thus created the means of ending the conflict.’ For feminist revolution
we shall need an analysis of the dynamics of sex war as comprehensive as
the Marx-Engels analysis of class antagonism was for the economic
revolution. More comprehensive. For we are dealing with a larger
problem, with an oppression that goes back beyond recorded history to
the animal kingdom itself.

In creating such an analysis we can learn a lot from Marx and Engels:
not their literal opinions about women – about the condition of women as
an oppressed class they know next to nothing, recognizing it only where
it overlaps with economics – but rather their analytic method.

Marx and Engels outdid their socialist forerunners in that they
developed a method of analysis which was both dialectical and
materialist. The first in centuries to view history dialectically, they
saw the world as process, a natural flux of action and reaction, of
opposites yet inseparable and interpenetrating. Because they were able
to perceive history as movie rather than as snapshot, they attempted to
avoid falling into the stagnant ‘metaphysical’ view that had trapped so
many other great minds. (This sort of analysis itself may be a product
of the sex division, as discussed in Chapter 9.) They combined this view
of the dynamic interplay of historical forces with a materialist one,
that is, they attempted for the first time to put historical and
cultural change on a real basis, to trace the development of economic
classes to organic causes. By understanding thoroughly the mechanics of
history, they hoped to show men how to master it.

Socialist thinkers prior to Marx and Engels, such as Fourier, Owen, and
Bebel, had been able to do no more than moralize about existing social
inequalities, positing an ideal world where class privilege and
exploitation should not exist – in the same way that early feminist
thinkers posited a world where male privilege and exploitation ought not
exist – by mere virtue of good will. In both cases, because the early
thinkers did not really understand how the social injustice had evolved,
maintained itself, or could be eliminated, their ideas existed in a
cultural vacuum, utopian. Marx and Engels, on the other hand, attempted
a scientific approach to history. They traced the class conflict to its
real economic origins, projecting an economic solution based on
objective economic preconditions already present: the seizure by the
proletariat of the means of production would lead to a communism in
which government had withered away, no longer needed to repress the
lower class for the sake of the higher. In the classless society the
interests of every individual would be synonymous with those of the
larger society.

But the doctrine of historical materialism, much as it was a brilliant
advance over previous historical analysis, was not the complete answer,
as later events bore out. For though Marx and Engels grounded their
theory in reality, it was only a partial reality. Here is Engels’s
strictly economic definition of historical materialism from Socialism:
Utopian or Scientific:

Historical materialism is that view of the course of history which seeks
the ultimate cause and the great moving power of all historical events
in the economic development of society, in the changes of the modes of
production and exchange, in the consequent division of society into
distinct classes, and in the struggles of these classes against one
another. (Italics mine)

Further, he claims:

… that all past history with the exception of the primitive stages was
the history of class struggles; that these warring classes of society
are always the products of the modes of production and exchange – in a
word, of the economic conditions of their time; that the economic
structure of society always furnishes the real basis, starting from
which we can alone work out the ultimate explanation of the whole
superstructure of juridical and political institutions as well as of the
religious, philosophical, and other ideas of a given historical period.
(Italics mine)

It would be a mistake to attempt to explain the oppression of women
according to this strictly economic interpretation. The class analysis
is a beautiful piece of work, but limited: although correct in a linear
sense, it does not go deep enough. There is a whole sexual substratum of
the historical dialectic that Engels at times dimly perceives, but
because he can see sexuality only through an economic filter, reducing
everything to that, he is unable to evaluate in its own right.

Engels did observe that the original division of labour was between man
and woman for the purposes of child-breeding; that within the family the
husband was the owner, the wife the means of production, the children
the labour; and that reproduction of the human species was an important
economic system distinct from the means of
production.[1](#part0017.html#chapter1-1)

But Engels has been given too much credit for these scattered
recognitions of the oppression of women as a class. In fact he
acknowledged the sexual class system only where it overlapped and
illuminated his economic construct. Engels didn’t do so well even in
this respect. But Marx was worse: there is a growing recognition of
Marx’s bias against women (a cultural bias shared by Freud as well as
all men of culture), dangerous if one attempts to squeeze feminism into
an orthodox Marxist framework – freezing what were only incidental
insights of Marx and Engels about sex class into dogma. Instead, we must
enlarge historical materialism to include the strictly Marxian, in the
same way that the physics of relativity did not invalidate Newtonian
physics so much as it drew a circle around it, limiting its application
– but only through comparison – to a smaller sphere. For an economic
diagnosis traced to ownership of the means of production, even of the
means of reproduction, does not explain everything. There is a level of
reality that does not stem directly from economics.

The assumption that, beneath economics, reality is psycho-sexual is
often rejected as ahistorical by those who accept a dialectical
materialist view of history because it seems to land us back where Marx
began: groping through a fog of utopian hypotheses, philosophical
systems that might be right, that might be wrong (there is no way to
tell), systems that explain concrete historical developments by a priori
categories of thought; historical materialism, however, attempted to
explain ‘knowing’ by ‘being’ and not vice versa.

But there is still an untried third alternative: we can attempt to
develop a materialist view of history based on sex itself.

The early feminist theorists were to a materialist view of sex what
Fourier, Bebel, and Owen were to a materialist view of class. By and
large, feminist theory has been as inadequate as were the early feminist
attempts to correct sexism. This was to be expected. The problem is so
immense that, at first try, only the surface could be skimmed, the most
blatant inequalities described. Simone de Beauvoir was the only one who
came close to – who perhaps has done – the definitive analysis. Her
profound work The Second Sex – which appeared as recently as the early
fifties to a world convinced that feminism was dead – for the first time
attempted to ground feminism in its historical base. Of all feminist
theorists De Beauvoir is the most comprehensive and far-reaching,
relating feminism to the best ideas in our culture.

It may be this virtue is also her one failing: she is almost too
sophisticated, too knowledgeable. Where this becomes a weakness – and
this is still certainly debatable – is in her rigidly existentialist
interpretation of feminism (one wonders how much Sartre had to do with
this). This, in view of the fact that all cultural systems, including
existentialism, are themselves determined by the sex dualism. She says:

Man never thinks of himself without thinking of the Other; he views the
world under the sign of duality which is not in the first place sexual
in character. But being different from man, who sets himself up as the
Same, it is naturally to the category of the Other that woman is
consigned; the Other includes woman. (Italics mine.)

Perhaps she has overshot her mark: Why postulate a fundamental Hegelian
concept of Otherness as the final explanation –and then carefully
document the biological and historical circumstances that have pushed
the class ‘women’ into such a category – when one has never seriously
considered the much simpler and more likely possibility that this
fundamental dualism sprang from the sexual division itself? To posit a
priori categories of thought and existence – ‘Otherness’,
‘Transcendence’, ‘Immanence’ – into which history then falls may not be
necessary. Marx and Engels had discovered that these philosophical
categories themselves grew out of history.

Before assuming such categories, let us first try to develop an analysis
in which biology itself – procreation – is at the origin of the dualism.
The immediate assumption of the layman that the unequal division of the
sexes is ‘natural’ may be well-founded. We need not immediately look
beyond this. Unlike economic class, sex class sprang directly from a
biological reality: men and women were created different, and not equal.
Although, as De Beauvoir points out, this difference of itself did not
necessitate the development of a class system – the domination of one
group by another – the reproductive functions of these differences did.
The biological family is an inherently unequal power distribution. The
need for power leading to the development of classes arises from the
psychosexual formation of each individual according to this basic
imbalance, rather than, as Freud, Norman O. Brown, and others have, once
again overshooting their mark, postulated, some irreducible conflict of
Life against Death, Eros vs. Thanatos.

The biological family – the basic reproductive unit of
male/female/infant, in whatever form of social organization – is
characterized by these fundamental – if not immutable – facts:

(1) That women throughout history before the advent of birth control
were at the continual mercy of their biology – menstruation, menopause,
and ‘female ills’, constant painful childbirth, wetnursing and care of
infants, all of which made them dependent on males (whether brother,
father, husband, lover, or clan, government, community-at-large) for
physical survival.

(2) That human infants take an even longer time to grow up than animals,
and thus are helpless and, for some short period at least, dependent on
adults for physical survival.

(3) That a basic mother/child interdependency has existed in some form
in every society, past or present, and thus has shaped the psychology of
every mature female and every infant.

(4) That the natural reproductive difference between the sexes led
directly to the first division of labour at the origins of class, as
well as furnishing the paradigm of caste (discrimination based on
biological characteristics).

These biological contingencies of the human family cannot be covered
over with anthropological sophistries. Anyone observing animals mating,
reproducing, and caring for their young will have a hard time accepting
the ‘cultural relativity’ line. For no matter how many tribes in Oceania
you can find where the connection of the father to fertility is not
known, no matter how many matrilineages, no matter how many cases of
sex-role reversal, male housewifery, or even empathic labour pains,
these facts prove only one thing: the amazing flexibility of human
nature. But human nature is adaptable to something, it is, yes,
determined by its environmental conditions. And the biological family
that we have described has existed everywhere throughout time. Even in
matriarchies where woman’s fertility is worshipped, and the father’s
role is unknown or unimportant, if perhaps not on the genetic father,
there is still some dependence of the female and the infant on the male.
And though it is true that the nuclear family is only a recent
development, one which, as I shall attempt to show, only intensifies the
psychological penalties of the biological family, though it is true that
throughout history there have been many variations on this biological
family, the contingencies I have described existed in all of them,
causing specific psychosexual distortions in the human personality.

But to grant that the sexual imbalance of power is biologically based is
not to lose our case. We are no longer just animals. And the kingdom of
nature does not reign absolute. As Simone de Beauvoir herself admits:

The theory of historical materialism has brought to light some important
truths. Humanity is not an animal species, it is a historical reality.
Human society is an antiphysis – in a sense it is against nature; it
does not passively submit to the presence of nature but rather takes
over the control of nature on its own behalf. This arrogation is not an
inward, subjective operation; it is accomplished objectively in
practical action.

Thus the ‘natural’ is not necessarily a ‘human’ value. Humanity has
begun to transcend Nature: we can no longer justify the maintenance of a
discriminatory sex class system on grounds of its origins in nature.
Indeed, for pragmatic reasons alone it is beginning to look as if we
must get rid of it (see Chapter 10).

The problem becomes political, demanding more than a comprehensive
historical analysis, when one realizes that, though man is increasingly
capable of freeing himself from the biological conditions that created
his tyranny over women and children, he has little reason to want to
give this tyranny up. As Engels said, in the context of economic
revolution:

It is the law of division of labour that lies at the basis of the
division into classes. \[Note that this division itself grew out of a
fundamental biological division.\] But this does not prevent the ruling
class, once having the upper hand, from consolidating its power at the
expense of the working class, from turning its social leadership into an
intensified exploitation of the masses.

Though the sex class system may have originated in fundamental
biological conditions, this does not guarantee once the biological basis
of their oppression has been swept away that women and children will be
freed. On the contrary, the new technology, especially fertility
control, may be used against them to reinforce the entrenched system of
exploitation.

So that just as to assure elimination of economic classes requires the
revolt of the underclass (the proletariat) and, in a temporary
dictatorship, their seizure of the means of production, so to assure the
elimination of sexual classes requires the revolt of the underclass
(women) and the seizure of control of reproduction: not only the full
restoration to women of ownership of their own bodies, but also their
(temporary) seizure of control of human fertility – the new population
biology as well as all the social institutions of child-bearing and
child-rearing. And just as the end goal of socialist revolution was not
only the elimination of the economic class privilege but of the economic
class distinction itself, so the end goal of feminist revolution must
be, unlike that of the first feminist movement, not just the elimination
of male privilege but of the sex distinction itself: genital differences
between human beings would no longer matter culturally. (A reversion to
an unobstructed pansexuality – Freud’s ‘polymorphous perversity’ – would
probably supersede hetero/homo/bi-sexuality.) The reproduction of the
species by one sex for the benefit of both would be replaced by (at
least the option of) artificial reproduction: children would be born to
both sexes equally, or independently of either, however one chooses to
look at it; the dependence of the child on the mother (and vice versa)
would give way to a greatly shortened dependence on a small group of
others in general, and any remaining inferiority to adults in physical
strength would be compensated for culturally. The division of labour
would be ended by the elimination of labour altogether (through
cybernetics). The tyranny of the biological family would be broken.

And with it the psychology of power. As Engels claimed for strictly
socialist revolution: ‘The existence of not simply this or that ruling
class but of any ruling class at all \[will have\] become an obsolete
anachronism.’ That socialism has never come near achieving this
predicated goal is not only the result of unfulfilled or misfired
economic preconditions, but also because the Marxian analysis itself was
insufficient: it did not dig deep enough to the psychosexual roots of
class. Marx was on to something more profound than he knew when he
observed that the family contained within itself in embryo all the
antagonisms that later develop on a wide scale within the society and
the state. For unless revolution uproots the basic social organization,
the biological family – the vinculum through which the psychology of
power can always be smuggled – the tapeworm of exploitation will never
be annihilated. We shall need a sexual revolution much larger than –
inclusive of – a socialist one to truly eradicate all class systems.

\*   \*   \*

I have attempted to take the class analysis one step further to its
roots in the biological division of the sexes. We have not thrown out
the insights of the socialists; on the contrary, radical feminism can
enlarge their analysis, granting it an even deeper basis in objective
conditions and thereby explaining many of its insolubles. As a first
step in this direction, and as the groundwork for our own analysis we
shall expand Engels’s definition of historical materialism. Here is the
same definition quoted above now rephrased to include the biological
division of the sexes for the purpose of reproduction, which lies at the
origins of class:

Historical materialism is that view of the course of history which seeks
the ultimate cause and the great moving power of all historic events in
the dialectic of sex: the division of society into two distinct
biological classes for procreative reproduction, and the struggles of
these classes with one another; in the changes in the modes of marriage,
reproduction and child care created by these struggles; in the connected
development of other physically-differentiated classes \[castes\]; and
in the first division of labour based on sex which developed into the
\[economic-cultural\] class system.

And here is the cultural superstructure, as well as the economic one,
traced not just back to economic class, but all the way back to sex:

All past history \[note that we can now eliminate ‘with the exception of
primitive stages’\] was the history of class struggle. These warring
classes of society are always the product of the modes of organization
of the biological family unit for reproduction of the species, as well
as of the strictly economic modes of production and exchange of goods
and services. The sexual-reproductive organization of society always
furnishes the real basis, starting from which we can alone work out the
ultimate explanation of the whole superstructure of economic, juridical
and political institutions as well as of the religious, philosophical
and other ideas of a given historical period.

And now Engels’s projection of the results of a materialist approach to
history is more realistic:

The whole sphere of the conditions of life which environ man and have
hitherto ruled him now comes under the dominion and control of man who
for the first time becomes the real conscious Lord of Nature, master of
his own social organization.

\*   \*   \*

In the following chapters we shall assume this definition of historical
materialism, examining the cultural institutions that maintain and
reinforce the biological family (especially its present manifestation,
the nuclear family) and its result, the psychology of power, an
aggressive chauvinism now developed enough to destroy us. We shall
integrate this with a feminist analysis of Freudianism: for Freud’s
cultural bias, like that of Marx and Engels, does not invalidate his
perception entirely. In fact, Freud had insights of even greater value
than those of the socialist theorists for the building of a new
dialectical materialism based on sex. We shall attempt, then, to
correlate the best of Engels and Marx (the historical materialist
approach) with the best of Freud (the understanding of the inner man and
woman and what shapes them) to arrive at a solution both political and
personal yet grounded in real conditions. We shall see that Freud
observed the dynamics of psychology correctly in its immediate social
context, but because the fundamental structure of that social context
was basic to all humanity – to different degrees – it appeared to be
nothing less than an absolute existential condition which it would be
insane to question – forcing Freud and many of his followers to
postulate a priori constructs like the Death Wish to explain the origins
of these universal psychological drives. This in turn made the
sicknesses of humanity irreducible and incurable – which is why his
proposed solution (psychoanalytic therapy), a contradiction in terms,
was so weak compared to the rest of his work, and such a resounding
failure in practice – causing those of social/political sensibility to
reject not only his therapeutic solution, but his most profound
discoveries as well.

2 On American Feminism

In the radical feminist view, the new feminism is not just the revival
of a serious political movement for social equality. It is the second
wave of the most important revolution in history. Its aim: overthrow of
the oldest, most rigid class/caste system in existence, the class system
based on sex – a system consolidated over thousands of years, lending
the archetypal male and female roles an undeserved legitimacy and
seeming permanence. In this perspective, the pioneer Western feminist
movement was only the first onslaught, the fifty-year ridicule that
followed it only a first counter-offensive – the dawn of a long struggle
to break free from the oppressive power structures set up by nature and
reinforced by man. In this light, let’s take a look at American
feminism.

I

THE WOMAN’S RIGHTS MOVEMENT IN AMERICA

Though there have always been women rebels in
history,[1](#part0017.html#chapter2-1) the conditions have never before
existed that would enable women effectively to overthrow their
oppressive roles. Women’s capacity for reproduction was urgently needed
by the society – and even if it hadn’t been, effective birth control
methods were not available. So until the Industrial Revolution feminist
rebellion was bound to remain only a personal one.

The coming feminist revolution of the age of technology was foreshadowed
by the thought and writing of individual women, members of the
intellectual élites of their day: in England Mary Wollstonecraft and
Mary Shelley, in America Margaret Fuller, in France the Bluestockings.
But these women were ahead of their time. They had a hard time getting
their ideas accepted even in their own advanced circles, let alone by
the masses of men and women of their day, who had barely absorbed the
first shock of the Industrial Revolution.

By the middle of the nineteenth century, however, with industrialization
in full swing, a full-fledged feminist movement got underway. Always
strong in the US–itself founded shortly before the Industrial
Revolution, and thus having comparatively little history or tradition –
feminism was spurred on by the Abolitionist struggle and the smouldering
ideals of the American Revolution itself. (The Declaration passed at the
first national Woman’s Rights convention at Seneca Falls in 1848 was
modelled on the Declaration of Independence.)

The early American Woman’s Rights Movement[2](#part0017.html#chapter2-2)
was radical. In the nineteenth century, for women to attack the Family,
the Church (see Elizabeth Cady Stanton’s Woman’s Bible), and the State
(law) was for them to attack the very cornerstones of the Victorian
society in which they lived – equivalent to attacking sex distinctions
themselves in our own time. The theoretical foundations of the early WRM
grew out of the most radical ideas of the day, notably those of
abolitionists like William Lloyd Garrison and such communalists as R. D.
Owen and Fanny Wright. Few people today are aware that the early
feminism was a true grass-roots movement: they haven’t heard of the
tortuous journeys made by feminist pioneers into backwoods and
frontiers, or door to door in the towns to speak about the issues or to
collect signatures for petitions that were laughed right out of the
Assemblies. Nor do they know that Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B.
Anthony, the most militant feminists of the movement, were among the
first to stress the importance of organizing women workers, founding the
Working Woman’s Association in September, 1868. (Delegates to the
National Labor Union Convention as early as 1868, they later fell out
over the short-changing of women workers by the – hasn’t changed – male
chauvinist labour movement.) Other pioneer female labour organizers such
as Augusta Lewis and Kate Mullaney were in the feminist movement.

This radical movement was built by women who had literally no civil
status under the law; who were pronounced civilly dead upon marriage, or
who remained legal minors if they did not marry; who could not sign a
will or even have custody of their own children upon divorce; who were
not taught even to read, let alone admitted to college (the most
privileged of them were equipped with a knowledge of embroidery, china
painting, French, and harpsichord); who had no political voice whatever.
Thus, even after the Civil War, more than half the USA’s population was
still legally enslaved, literally not owning even the bustles on their
backs.

The first stirrings of this oppressed class, the first simple demands
for justice, were met by a disproprotionate violence, a resistance
difficult to understand today when the lines of sexual class have been
blurred over. For, as often happens, the revolutionary potential of the
first awakening was recognized more clearly by those in power than it
was by the crusaders themselves. From its very beginning the feminist
movement posed a serious threat to the established order, its very
existence and long duration testifying to fundamental inequalities in a
system that pretended to democracy. Working first together, later
separately, the Abolitionist Movement and the WRM threatened to tear the
country apart. If, in the Civil War, the feminists hadn’t been persuaded
to abandon their cause to work on ‘more important’ issues, the early
history of feminist revolution might have been less dismal.

As it was, although the Stanton-Anthony forces struggled on in the
radical feminist tradition for twenty years longer, the back of the
movement had been broken. Thousands of women, at the impetus of the
Civil War, had been allowed out of the home to do charity work. The only
issue on which these very different camps of organized women could unite
was the desirability of the vote – but predictably, they did not agree
upon why it was desirable. The conservatives formed the American Woman
Suffrage Association, or joined the sprouting women’s clubs, such as the
pious Woman’s Christian Temperance Union. The radicals separated into
the National Woman’s Suffrage Association, concerned with the vote only
as a symbol of the political power they needed to achieve larger ends.

By 1890, further legal reforms had been won, women had entered the
labour force in the service capacity that they still hold today, and
they had begun to be educated in larger numbers. In lieu of true
political power they had been granted a token, segregated place in the
public sphere as clubwomen. But though indeed this was a greater
political power than before, it was only a newfangled version of female
‘power’ of the usual sort: behind the throne – a traditional influence
on power which took modern form in lobbying and embarrassment tactics.
When, in 1890, with their leaders old and discouraged, the radical
feminist National merged with the conservative American to form the
National American Woman Suffrage Association (NAWSA), all seemed lost.
Conservative feminism, with its concentration on broad, unitive,
single-issues like suffrage, with its attempt to work within and placate
the white male power structure – trying to convince men who knew better,
with their own fancy rhetoric yet – had won. Feminism, sold out,
languished.

Even worse than the conservative feminists were the increasing number of
women who, with their new-found bit of freedom, jumped enthusiastically
into all the radicalisms of the day, the various social reform movements
of the Progressive Era, even when at odds with feminist interests.
(Consider the old debate about discriminatory ‘protective’ labour laws
for women.) Margaret Rhondda, Britain’s leading post-First World War
feminist, put it this way:

One may divide the women in the woman’s movement into two groups: the
Feminists and the reformers who are not in the least Feminists; who do
not care tuppence about equality for itself … Now almost every women’s
organization recognizes that reformers are far more common than
Feminists, that the passion to decide to look after your fellowmen, to
do good to them in your way, is far more common than the desire to put
into everyone’s hand the power to look after themselves.

These ‘reformers’, the women ‘radicals’ of their day, were at best
influenced by feminism. They were neither true feminists nor true
radicals because they did not yet see the woman’s cause as a legitimate
radical issue in itself. By seeing the WRM as only tangent to another,
more important politics, they were in a sense viewing themselves as
defective men: women’s issues seemed to them ‘special’, ‘sectarian’,
while issues that concerned men were ‘human’, ‘universal’. Developing
politically in movements dominated by men, they became preoccupied with
reforming their position within those movements rather than getting out
and creating their own. The Woman’s Trade Union League is a good
example: women politicos in this group failed at the most basic
undertakings because they were unable to sever their ties with the
strongly male chauvinist AFL, under Samuel Gompers, which sold them out
time and again. Or, in another example, like so many VISTA volunteers
bent on slumming it with an ungrateful poor, they rushed into the young
settlement movement, many of them giving their lives without reward –
only to become the rather grim, embittered, but devoted spinster social
workers of the stereotype. Or the Woman’s Peace Party founded to no
avail by Jane Addams on the eve of American intervention in the First
World War, which later split into, ironically, either jingoist groups
working for the war effort, or radical pacifists as ineffective as they
were extreme.

This frenzied feminine organizational activity of the Progressive Era is
often confused with the WRM proper. But the image of the frustrated,
bossy battle-axe derives less from the radical feminists than from the
non-feminist politicos, committee women for the various important causes
of their day. In addition to the now defunct movements we have mentioned
– the Woman’s Trade Union League, the National Federation of
Settlements, and the Woman’s International League for Peace and Freedom
(formerly the Woman’s Peace Party, begun by Jane Addams) – the whole
spectrum of Organized Ladyhood was founded in the era between 1890 and
1920: The General Federation of Women’s Clubs, the League of Women
Voters, the American Association of Collegiate Alumnae, the National
Consumer’s League, the PTA, even the DAR. Although these organizations
were associated with the most radical movements of their day, that in
fact their politics were reactionary, and finally fatuous and silly, was
indicated at first solely by their non-feminist views.

Thus the majority of organized women in the period between 1890–1920 – a
period usually cited as a high point of feminist activity – had nothing
to do with feminism. On the one hand, feminism had been constricted to
the single issue of the vote – the WRM was (temporarily) transformed
into a suffrage movement – and on the other, women’s energies were
diffused into any other radical cause but their own.

But radical feminism was only dormant: the awakening began with the
return of Harriet Stanton Blatch, the daughter of Elizabeth Cady
Stanton, from England, where she had joined the militant Woman’s Social
and Political Union – the English Suffragettes of whom the Pankhursts
are perhaps the best known – in opposing the Constitutionalists
(conservative feminists). Believing that militant tactics were needed to
achieve the radical goals espoused by her mother, she recommended
attacking the problem of the vote with the discarded strategy of the
Stanton–Anthony faction: pressure to amend the federal Constitution.
Soon the American militants split off from the conservative NAWSA to
form the Congressional Union (later the Woman’s Party), beginning the
daring guerrilla tactics and uncompromisingly tough line for which the
whole suffrage movement is often incorrectly credited.

It worked. Militants had to undergo embarrassment, mobbings, beatings,
even hunger strikes with forced feeding, but within a decade the vote
was won. The spark of radical feminism was just what the languishing
suffrage movement needed to push through their single issue. It provided
a new and sound approach (the pressure for a national amendment rather
than the tedious state-by-state organizing method used for over thirty
years), a militancy that dramatized the urgency of the woman issue, and
above all, a wider perspective, one in which the vote was seen as only
the first of many goals, and therefore to be won as quickly as possible.
The mild demands of the conservative feminists, who had all but pleaded
that if they won the vote they wouldn’t use it, were welcomed as by far
the lesser of two evils in comparison with the demands of the Woman’s
Party.

But with the granting of the vote the establishment co-opted the woman’s
movement. As one gentleman of that period, quoted by William O’Neill in
Everyone Was Brave, summarized it, ‘Nevertheless woman suffrage is a
good thing if only to have it over with.’ Mrs Oliver Hazard Perry
Belmont of the Woman’s Party urged women to boycott the elections:
‘Husband your new power. Suffragists did not fight for your emancipation
for seventy years to have you become servants to men’s parties.’
Charlotte Perkins Gilman seconded this:

The power women will be able to exercise lies with their not joining a
party system of men. The party system of politics is a trick of men to
conceal the real issues. Women should work for the measures they want
outside of party politics. It is because the old political parties
realize that woman’s influence will be so negligible on the inside that
they are so eager to get women to join them.

But none of this was to any avail. Even the formation of a new Woman’s
Party on 18 February 1921, as an alternative to the major parties that
were so rapidly absorbing woman’s new political strength, could not
resuscitate the dying movement.[3](#part0017.html#chapter2-3)

The granting of the vote to the suffrage movement killed the WRM. Though
the antifeminist forces appeared to give in, they did so in name only.
They never lost. By the time the vote was granted, the long channelling
of feminist energies into the limited goal of suffrage – seen initially
as only one step to political power – had thoroughly depleted the WRM.
The monster Ballot had swallowed everything else. Three generations had
elapsed from the time of the inception of the WRM; the master-planners
all were dead. The women who later joined the feminist movement to work
for the single issue of the vote had never had time to develop a broader
consciousness: by then they had forgotten what the vote was for. The
opposition had had its way.

\*   \*   \*

Of all that struggle what is even remembered? The fight for suffrage
alone – not worth much to women, as later events bore out – was an
endless war against the most reactionary forces in America at the time,
which, as Eleanor Flexner shows in Century of Struggle, included the
biggest capitalist interests of the North, i.e. oil, manufacturing,
railroad, and liquor interests; the racist bloc of southern states
(which, in addition to their own bigotry about women, were afraid to
grant the woman’s vote because it would enfranchise another half of the
Negro race, as well as draw attention to the hypocrisy of ‘universal’
male suffrage), and, finally, the machine of government itself. The work
involved to achieve this vote was staggering. Carrie Chapman Catt
estimated that:

to get the word ‘male’ out of the constitution cost the women of this
country 52 years of pauseless campaign … During that time they were
forced to conduct 56 campaigns of referenda to male voters, 480
campaigns to get legislatures to submit suffrage amendments to voters,
47 campaigns to get state constitutional conventions to write woman
suffrage into state constitutions, 277 campaigns to get state party
conventions to include woman suffrage planks, 30 campaigns to get
presidential party conventions to adopt woman suffrage planks in party
platforms and 19 successive campaigns with 19 successive Congresses.

Thus defeat was so frequent, and victory so rare – and then achieved by
such bare margins – that even to read about the struggle for suffrage is
exhausting, let alone to have lived through it and fought for it. The
lapse of historians in this area is understandable, if not pardonable.

But, as we have seen, suffrage was only one small aspect of what the WRM
was all about. A hundred years of brilliant personalities and important
events have also been erased from American history. The women orators
who fought off mobs, in the days when women were not allowed to speak in
public, to attack Family, Church, and State, who travelled on poor
railways to cow towns of the West to talk to small groups of socially
starved women, were quite a bit more dramatic than the Scarlett O’Haras
and Harriet Beecher Stowes and all the Little Women who have come down
to us. Sojourner Truth and Harriet Tubman, freed slaves who went back
time and again, with huge prices on their heads, to free other slaves on
their own plantations, were more effective in their efforts than the
ill-fated John Brown. But most people today have never even heard of
Myrtilla Miner, Prudence Crandall, Abigail Scott Duniway, Mary Putnam
Jacobi, Ernestine Rose, the Claflin sisters, Crystal Eastman, Clara
Lemlich, Mrs O. H. P. Belmont, Doris Stevens, Anne Martin. And this
ignorance is nothing compared to ignorance of the lives of women of the
stature of Margaret Fuller, Fanny Wright, the Grimké sisters, Susan B.
Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Harriet Stanton Blatch, Charlotte
Perkins Gilman, Alice Paul.

And yet we know about Louisa May Alcott, Clara Barton, and Florence
Nightingale, just as we know about, rather than Nat Turner, the triumph
of Ralph Bunche, or George Washington Carver and the peanut. The
omission of vital characters from standard versions of American history
in favour of such goody-good models cannot be tossed off. Just as it
would be dangerous to inspire still-oppressed black children with
admiration for the Nat Turners of their history, so it is with the WRM:
the suspicious blanks in our history books concerning feminism – or else
the confusion of the whole WRM with the (conservative) suffrage movement
or the reformist women’s groups of the Progressive Era – is no accident.

It is part of a backlash we are still undergoing in reaction to the
first feminist struggle. The few strong models allowed girls growing up
in the fifty-year silence have been carefully chosen ones, women like
Eleanor Roosevelt, of the altruistic feminine tradition, as opposed to
the healthily selfish giants of the radical feminist rebellion. This
cultural backlash was to be expected. Men of those days grasped
immediately the true nature of a feminist movement, recognizing it as a
serious threat to their open and unashamed power over woman. They may
have been forced to buy off the women’s movement with confusing surface
reforms – a correction of the most blatant inequalities on the books, a
few changes of dress, sex, style (‘you’ve come a long way, baby’), all
of which coincidentally benefited men. But the power stayed in their
hands.

II

THE FIFTY-YEAR RIDICULE

How did the Myth of Emancipation operate culturally over a fifty-year
period to anaesthetize women’s political consciousness?

In the twenties eroticism came in big. The gradual blurring together of
romance with the institution of marriage began (‘Love and marriage, Love
and marriage, go together like a horse and carriage…’), serving to
repopularize and reinforce the failing institution, weakened by the late
feminist attack. But the convalescence didn’t last long: women were soon
reprivatized, their new class solidarity diffused. The conservative
feminists, who at least had viewed their problems as social, had been
coopted, while the radical feminists were openly and effectively
ridiculed; eventually even the innocuous committee women of other
movements came to appear ridiculous. The cultural campaign had begun:
emancipation was one’s private responsibility; salvation was personal,
not political. Women took off on a long soul-search for ‘fulfilment’.

Here, in the twenties, is the beginning of that obsessive modern
cultivation of ‘style’, the search for glamour (You too can be Theda
Bara), a cultural disease still dissipating women today – fanned by
women’s magazines of the Vogue, Glamour, Mademoiselle, Cosmopolitan
variety. The search for a ‘different’, personal, style with which to
‘express’ oneself replaced the old feminist emphasis on character
development through responsibility and learning experience.

In the thirties, after the Depression, women sobered. Flapperism was
obviously not the answer: they felt more hung up and neurotic than ever
before. But with the myth of emancipation going full blast, women dared
not complain. If they had gotten what they wanted, and were still
dissatisfied, then something must be wrong with them. Secretly they
suspected that maybe they really mere inferior after all. Or maybe it
was just the social order: they joined the Communist party, where once
again they empathized mightily with the underdog, unable to acknowledge
that the strong identification they felt with the exploited working
class came directly from their own experience of oppression.

In the forties there was another world war to think about. Personal
hangups were temporarily overshadowed by the spirit of the war effort –
patriotism and self-righteousness, intensified by a ubiquitous military
propaganda, were their own kind of high. Besides, the cats were away.
Better yet, their thrones of power were vacant. Women had substantial
jobs for the first time in several decades. Genuinely needed by society
to their fullest capacity, they were temporarily granted human, as
opposed to female, status. (In fact, feminists are forced to welcome
wars as their only chance.)

The first long stretch of peace and affluence in some time occurred in
the late forties and the fifties. But instead of the predictable
resurgence of feminism, after so many blind alleys, there was only ‘The
Feminine Mystique’, which Betty Friedan has documented so well. This
sophisticated cultural apparatus was hauled out for a specific purpose:
women had gotten hired during the war, and now had to be made to quit.
Their new employment gains had come only because they had been found to
make a convenient surplus labour force, for use in just such time of
crisis – and yet, one couldn’t now just openly fire them. That would
give the lie to the whole carefully cultivated myth of emancipation. A
better idea was to have them quit of their own volition. The Feminine
Mystique suited the purpose admirably. Women, still frantic, still
searching (after all, a factory job is no man’s idea of heaven either,
even if it is preferable to woman’s caged hell), took yet another false
road.

This one was perhaps worse than any of the others. It offered neither
the (shallow) sensuality of the twenties, the commitment to a (false)
ideal of the thirties, nor the collective spirit (propaganda) of the
forties. What it did offer women was respectability and upward mobility
– along with Disillusioned Romance, plenty of diapers and PTA meetings
(Margaret Mead’s Mother Nurture), family arguments, endless and
ineffective diets, TV soap operas and commercials to kill the boredom,
and, if the pain still persisted, psychotherapy. Good Housekeeping and
Parents’ Magazine spoke for every woman of the middle class, just as
True Confessions did for the working class. The fifties was the bleakest
decade of all, perhaps the bleakest in some centuries for women.
According to the 1950 version of the Myth, women’s emancipation had
already been tried and found wanting (by women themselves, no doubt).
The first attempt to break away from a stifling Creative Motherhood
seemed to have failed utterly. All authentic knowledge of the old
feminist movement by this time had been buried, and with it the
knowledge that woman’s present misery was the product of a
still-virulent backlash.

For the youth of the fifties there was an even more sophisticated
cultural apparatus: ‘teenagerism’, the latest guise of that persevering
romanticism so bent on shoring up, by cultural fiat, a crumbling family
structure (see Chapter 7, ‘The Culture of Romance’). Young girls of all
ages dreamed of escaping the dull homes of their mothers through Teenage
Romance. The parked car, an established tradition since the era of the
flappers, became an urgent necessity, perhaps the one prop that best
characterized the passions of the fifties (see Edward Keinholz’s
‘environment’ of ‘The Parked Car’). The rituals of the high school
dating game compared in formality with the finest of Deep South
chivalric tradition, its twentieth-century ‘belle’ now a baton-twirling,
Sweet Sixteen cheerleader. The highest goal that a girl could achieve
was ‘popularity’, the old pleasing ‘grace’ in modern form.

But the boys couldn’t take it. The cloying romanticism and
sentimentality designed to keep women in their place had side effects on
the men involved. If there was to be a ritual of girl-chasing, some
males too would have to be sacrificed to it. Barbie needed a Ken. But
dating was a drag (‘Can I borrow the car tonight, Dad?’). Surely there
must be an easier way to get sex. Frankie Avalon and Paul Anka crooned
to teenage girls; the boys were tuned out.

In the sixties the boys split. They went to college and Down South. They
travelled to Europe in droves. Some joined the Peace Corps; others went
underground. But wherever they went they brought their camp followers.
Liberated men needed groovy chicks who could swing with their new life
style: women tried. They needed sex: women complied. But that’s all they
needed from women. If the chick got it into her head to demand some
old-fashioned return commitment, she was ‘uptight’, ‘screwed up’, or
worse yet, a ‘real bringdown’. A chick ought to learn to be independent
enough not to become a drag on her old man (trans. ‘clinging’). Women
couldn’t register fast enough: ceramics, weaving, leather talents,
painting classes, lit. and psych. courses, group therapy, anything to
get off his back. They sat in front of their various easels in tears.

Which is not to suggest that the ‘chicks’ themselves did not originally
want to escape from Nowheresville. There was just no place they could
go. Wherever they went, whether Greenwich Village c. 1960, Berkeley or
Mississippi c. 1964, Haight-Ashbury or the East Village c. 1967, they
were still only ‘chicks’, invisible as people. There was no marginal
society to which they could escape: the sexual class system existed
everywhere. Culturally immunized by the antifeminist backlash – if, in
the long blackout, they had heard of feminism at all, it was only
through its derogation – they were still afraid to organize around their
own problem. Thus they fell into the same trap that had swallowed up the
women of the twenties and thirties: the search for ‘the private
solution’.

The ‘private solution’ of the sixties, ironically, was as often the
‘bag’ of politics (radical politics, thus more marginal and idealistic
than the official – segregated – arenas of power) as it was art or
academia. Radical politics gave every woman the chance to do her thing.
Many women, repeating the thirties, saw politics not as a means towards
a better life, but as an end in itself. Many joined the peace movement,
always an acceptable feminine pastime: harmless because politically
impotent, it yet provided a vicarious outlet for female anger.

Others got involved in the civil rights movement: but though often no
more directly effective than was their participation in the peace
movement, white women’s numbered days in the black movement of the early
sixties proved to be a more valuable experience in terms of their own
political development. This is easy to detect in the present-day women’s
liberation movement. The women who went South are often much more
politically astute, flexible, and developed than women who came in from
the peace movement, and they tend to move towards radical feminism much
faster. Perhaps because this concern for the suffering of the blacks was
white women’s closest attempt since 1920 to face their own oppression:
to champion the cause of a more conspicuous underdog is a euphemistic
way of saying you yourself are the underdog. So just as the issue of
slavery spurred on the radical feminism of the nineteenth century, the
issue of racism now stimulated the new feminism: the analogy between
racism and sexism had to be made eventually. Once people had admitted
and confronted their own racism, they could not deny the parallel. And
if racism was expungable, why not sexism?

\*   \*   \*

I have described the fifty-year period between the end of the old
feminist movement and the beginning of the new in order to examine the
specific ways in which the Myth of Emancipation operated in each decade
to defuse the frustrations of modern women. The smear tactic was
effectively used to reprivatize women of the twenties and the thirties,
and thereafter it combined with a blackout of feminist history to keep
women hysterically circling through a maze of false solutions: the Myth
had effectively denied them a legitimate outlet for their frustration.
Therapy proved a failure as an outlet (see the following chapter). To
return to the home was no solution either – as the generation of the
forties and the fifties proved.

By 1970 the rebellious daughters of this wasted generation no longer,
for all practical purposes, even knew there had been a feminist
movement. There remained only the unpleasant residue of the aborted
revolution, an amazing set of contradictions in their roles: on the one
hand, they had most of the legal freedoms, the literal assurance that
they were considered full political citizens of society – and yet they
had no power. They had educational opportunities – and yet were unable,
and not expected, to employ them. They had the freedoms of clothing and
sex mores that they had demanded – and yet they were still sexually
exploited. The frustrations of their trapped position were exacerbated
by the development of mass media (see Chapter 7), in which these
contradictions were nakedly exposed, the ugliness of women’s roles
emphasized by precisely that intensive character which made of the new
media such a useful propaganda organ. The cultural indoctrinations
necessary to reinforce sex role traditions had become blatant,
tasteless, where before they had been insidious. Women, everywhere
bombarded with hateful or erotic images of themselves, were at first
bewildered by such distortion (could that be Me?), and, finally,
angered. At first, because feminism was still taboo, their anger and
frustration bottled up in complete withdrawal (Beatnik Bohemia and the
Flower/Drug Generation) or was channelled into dissent movements other
than their own, particularly the civil rights movement of the sixties,
the closest women had yet come to recognizing their own oppression. But
eventually the obvious analogy of their own situation to that of the
blacks, coupled with the general spirit of dissent, led to the
establishment of a women’s liberation movement proper. The anger spilled
over, finally, into its proper outlet.

But it would be false to attribute the resurgence of feminism only to
the impetus generated by other movements and ideas. For though they may
have acted as a catalyst, feminism, in truth, has a cyclical momentum
all its own. In the historical interpretation we have espoused, feminism
is the inevitable female response to the development of a technology
capable of freeing women from the tyranny of their sexual-reproductive
roles – both the fundamental biological condition itself, and the sexual
class system built upon, and reinforcing, this biological condition.

The increasing development of science in the twentieth century should
have only accelerated the initial feminist reaction to the Industrial
Revolution. (Fertility control alone, for example, a problem for which
the early feminists had no answer, has reached, in the period since
1920, its highest level of development in history.) The dynamics of the
counter-revolution which in conjunction with temporal crises such as war
and depression – obstructed the growth of feminism I have attempted to
describe. Because of such obstruction, new scientific developments that
could have greatly helped the feminist cause stayed in the lab, while
social-sexual practices not only continued as before but were actually
intensified, in reaction to the threat. Scientific advances which
threaten to further weaken or sever altogether the connection between
sex and reproduction have scarcely been realized culturally. That the
scientific revolution has had virtually no effect on feminism only
illustrates the political nature of the problem: the goals of feminism
can never be achieved through evolution, but only through revolution.
Power, however it has evolved, whatever its origins, will not be given
up without a struggle.

III

THE WOMEN’S LIBERATION[4](#part0017.html#chapter2-4) MOVEMENT

In three years, we have seen the whole political spectrum of the old
women’s movement recreated. The broad division between the radical
feminists and the two types of reformists, the conservative feminists
and the politicos, has reappeared in modern guise. There are roughly
three major camps in the movement now, themselves sub-divided. Let us
summarize them briefly, keeping in mind that in such a formative period
the politics, as well as the membership, of any one group is in a
continual state of flux.

(I) Conservative feminists. This camp, though now proliferating into
myriads of similar organizations, is perhaps still best exemplified by
its pioneer (and thus more hard-core feminist than is generally
believed) NOW, the National Organization of Women, begun in 1965 by
Betty Friedan after her reverberating publication of The Feminine
Mystique. Often called the NAACP of the woman’s movement (and indeed,
because it too is full of older professionals – career women who have
‘made it’ – it is similarly attacked by the younger liberation groups
for its ‘careerism’), NOW concentrates on the more superficial symptoms
of sexism – legal inequities, employment discrimination, and the like.

Thus in its politics it most resembles the suffragist movement of the
turn of the century, Carrie Chapman Catt’s National American Woman
Suffrage Association, with its stress on equality with men – legal,
economic, etc., within the given system – rather than liberation from
sex roles altogether, or radical questioning of family values. Like the
NAWSA, it tends to concentrate on the winning of single-issue political
gains, whatever the cost to political principles. Like the NAWSA, it has
attracted a wide membership, which it controls by traditional
bureaucratic procedures.

However, already in the young movement, it is apparent that this
position, untenable even in terms of immediate political gains – as
witnessed by the failure of the last conservative feminist movement – is
more a leftover of the old feminism (or, if you prefer, the forerunner)
rather than a model of the new. The many women who had joined for lack
of a better place to go soon shifted to radical feminism – and in doing
so have forced NOW into an increasing radicalism, cf., where once the
organization didn’t dare officially endorse even abortion law repeal for
fear of alienating those who could go no further than reform, now
abortion law repeal is one of its central demands.

(2) Politicos. The politicos of the contemporary women’s movement are
those women whose primary loyalty is to the Left (‘The Movement’) rather
than to the Women’s Liberation Movement proper. Like the politicos of
the Progressive Era, contemporary politicos see feminism as only tangent
to ‘real’ radical politics, instead of central, directly radical in
itself; they still see male issues, e.g., the draft, as universal, and
female issues, e.g., abortion, as sectarian. Within the contemporary
politico category is still a smaller spectrum, which can be roughly
broken down as follows:

(a) Ladies’ auxiliaries of the Left. Every major faction on the left,
and even some unions, by now – after considerable resistance – have
their women’s lib caucuses, which agitate against male chauvinism within
the organization, and for greater decision-making power for women. The
politicos of these caucuses are reformist in that their main objective
is to improve their own situation within the limited arena of leftist
politics. Other women are, at best, their foremost ‘constituency’,
strictly women’s issues no more than a useful ‘radicalizing’ tool to
recruit women into the ‘Larger Struggle’. Thus their attitude towards
other women tends to be patronizing and evangelistic, the ‘organizer’
approach. Here are some (female) Black Panthers in an interview in The
Movement, an underground paper, stating it in a way that is perhaps
embarrassing to the white left in its blatancy, but that nevertheless is
typical of (because lifted from?) most white revolutionary rhetoric on
the subject:

It’s very important that women who are more advanced, who already
understand revolutionary principles, go to them and explain it to them
and struggle with them. We have to recognize that women are backwards
politically and that we must struggle with them. (Italics mine)

Or again, concerning an independent women’s movement:

They lose sight of the Primary Struggle. Some special organizing of
women’s groups is possible, perhaps, but dangerous: in terms of turning
in on themselves, in terms of becoming petit bourgeois little cliques
where they just talk about taking care of the kids all the time, or
become a gripe session. (Italics mine)

We have here a complete denial by blacks (and women, no less) of their
own principles of Black Power as applied to another group: the right of
the oppressed to organize around their oppression as they see and define
it. It is sad that the Black Power movement, which taught women so much
about their political needs through the obvious parallels, should be the
last to see that parallel in reverse. (For a deeper analysis of why this
is so, see Chapter 5.) Grass-roots organizing, around one’s own
oppression, the end of leadership and power plays, the need for a mass
base prior to bloody struggle, all the most important principles of
radical politics suddenly do not apply to women, in a double standard of
the worst order.

The women’s liberation groups still attempting to work within the larger
leftist movement haven’t a chance, for their line is dictated from
above, their analysis and tactics shaped by the very class whose
illegitimate power they are protesting. And thus they rarely succeed in
doing more than increasing the tension that already threatens their
frayed leftist groups with extinction. If ever they do become powerful
they are bought off with tokens, or, if necessary, the larger group
quietly disintegrates and reorganizes without them. Often, in the end,
they are forced to split off and join the independent women’s movement
after all.

(b) Middle-of-the-road politicos. Working separately from, but still
under the protection of the male umbrella, these groups are ambivalent
and confused. They vacillate. Their obvious imitation of traditional
(male) left analysis, rhetoric, tactics, and strategy, whether or not
they are suited to the achievement of their own distinct goals, is
compensated for by a lot of sentimentalizing about the Oppressed Sisters
Out There. Their own politics tends to be ambiguous, because their
loyalties are: if they are no longer so sure that it is capitalism which
directly causes the exploitation of women, they do not go so far as to
intimate that men might have anything to do with it. Men are Brothers.
Women are Sisters. If one must talk about enemies at all, why not leave
it open and call it The System?

(c) The feminist politicos. This position describes perhaps the largest
proportion of the anonymous cell groups of the women’s liberation
movement across the country: it is the position towards which many of
the Middle-of-the-Roaders eventually drift. Basically it is a
conservative feminism with leftist overtones (or perhaps, more
accurately, it is a leftism with feminist overtones). While the feminist
politicos admit that women must organize around their own oppression as
they feel it, that they can best do this in independent groups, and that
the primary concentration of any women’s group should be on women’s
issues, every effort is still made to fit such activities into the
existing leftist analysis and framework of priorities – in which, of
course, Ladies never go first.

Despite the seeming diversity within such a spectrum, the three
positions can be reduced to one common denominator: feminism is
secondary in the order of political priorities, and must be tailored to
fit into a pre-existent (male-created) political framework. The fear
that if it isn’t watched feminism will go off the deep end, to become
divorced from The Revolution, gives away the politicos’ fear that
feminism is not a legitimate issue in itself, one that will
(unfortunately) require a revolution to achieve its ends.

And here we have the crux of it: politico women are unable to evolve an
authentic politics because they have never truly confronted their
oppression as women in a gut way. Their inability to originate a
feminist leftist analysis of their own, their need to tie their issue at
all times to some ‘primary struggle’ rather than seeing it as
revolutionary in itself, let alone central to all revolution, is derived
directly from their lingering feelings of inferiority as women. Their
inability to put their own needs first, their need for male approval –
in this case anti-establishment male approval – to legitimate them
politically, renders them incapable of breaking from other movements
when necessary, and thus consigns them to mere left reformism, lack of
originality, and, ultimately, political sterility.

However, the contrast of radical feminism, the more militant position in
the women’s liberation movement, has forced the politicos, as well as
the conservative feminists, into a growing defensiveness, and, finally,
into an increasing radicalism. At first Cuban and NLF women were the
unquestioned models, their freedom idolized; now there is a
let’s-wait-and-see attitude. Last year purely feminist issues were never
brought up without tacking on a tribute to the blacks, workers, or
students. This year spokesmen on the left instead talk pompously and
importantly of the abolition of the nuclear family. For the Left
Brotherhood have been quick to jump in to see what they could co-opt
–coming up with a statement against monogamy, at which clear sign of
male-at-work, feminists could only laugh bitterly. But still, where SDS
didn’t care a damn about a silly woman’s movement a few years ago, it
now has taken to giving its women a more and more glamorous role to keep
them from bolting, e.g., first place on the Ten Most Wanted list of
Weathermen and assorted guerrillas. There are the beginnings of the
official leftist acknowledgement of women as an important oppressed
group in their own right; some shallow understanding of the need for an
independent feminist movement; some degree of consideration of women’s
issues and complaints, e.g., abortion or day-care centres; and the
growing tokenism. And, as with the early stages of Black Power, there is
the same attempt to appease, the same nervous liberal laughter, the same
insensitivity to how it feels to be a woman, disguised under a
we’re-trying-give-us-a-kiss grin.

(3) Radical feminism. The two positions we have described usually
generate a third, the radical feminist position: the women in its ranks
range from disillusioned moderate feminists from NOW to disillusioned
leftists from the women’s liberation movement, and include others who
had been waiting for just such an alternative, women for whom neither
conservative bureaucratic feminism nor warmed-over leftist dogma had
much appeal.

The contemporary radical feminist position is the direct descendant of
the radical feminist line in the old movement, notably that championed
by Stanton and Anthony, and later by the militant Congressional Union
subsequently known as the Woman’s Party. It sees feminist issues not
only as women’s first priority, but as central to any larger
revolutionary analysis. It refuses to accept the existing leftist
analysis not because it is too radical, but because it is not radical
enough: it sees the current leftist analysis as outdated and
superficial, because this analysis does not relate the structure of the
economic class system to its origins in the sexual class system, the
model for all other exploitative systems, and thus the tapeworm that
must be eliminated first by any true revolution. In the following
chapters I shall explore the ideology of radical feminism and its
relation to other radical theory, in order to illustrate how it alone
succeeds in pulling into focus the many troubled areas of the leftist
analysis, providing for the first time a comprehensive revolutionary
solution.

Offhand we may note that the radical feminist movement has many
political assets that no other movement can claim, a revolutionary
potential far higher, as well as qualitatively different, from any in
the past:

(I) Distribution. Unlike minority groups (a historical accident), or the
proletariat (an economic development), women have always made up an
oppressed majority class (51 per cent), spread evenly throughout all
other classes. The most analogous movement in America, Black Power, even
could it instantly mobilize every black in the country, would command
only 15 per cent of the population. Indeed, all the oppressed minorities
together, generously assuming no factional infighting, would not make up
a majority – unless you included women. That women live with men, while
on some levels our worst disadvantage – the isolation of women from each
other has been responsible for the absence or weakness of women’s
liberation movements in the past – is, in another sense, an advantage: a
revolutionary in every bedroom cannot fail to shake up the status quo.
And if it’s your wife who is revolting, you can’t just split to the
suburbs. Feminism, when it truly achieves its goals, will crack through
the most basic structures of our society.

(2) Personal politics. The feminist movement is the first to combine
effectively the ‘personal’ with the ‘political’. It is developing a new
way of relating, a new political style, one that will eventually
reconcile the personal – always the feminine prerogative – with the
public, with the ‘world outside’, to restore that world to its emotions,
and literally to its senses.

The dichotomy between emotions and intellect has kept the established
movement from developing a mass base: on the one hand, there are the
orthodox leftists, either abstract university intellectuals out of touch
with concrete reality, or, in their activist guise, militantly into
machismo, self-indulgent in their action with little concern for
political effectiveness. On the other, there is Woodstock Nation, the
Youth Revolt, the Flower and Drug Generation of Hippies, Yippies,
Crazies, Motherfuckers, Mad Dogs, Hog Farmers, and the like, who, though
they understand that the old leafletting and pamphletting and Marxist
analysis are no longer where it’s at – that the problem is much deeper
than merely the struggle of the proletariat, which, in any case, is
hardly the American vanguard – yet have no solid historical analysis of
their own with which to replace it; indeed, who are apolitical. Thus the
Movement is foundering, either marginal, splintered, and ineffective due
to its rigid and outdated analysis or, where it does have mass movement
appeal, lacking a solid base in history and economics, ‘drop out’ rather
than revolutionary. The feminist movement is the urgently needed solder.

(3) The end of power psychology. Most revolutionary movements are unable
to practise among themselves what they preach. Strong leadership cults,
factionalism, ‘ego-tripping’, backbiting are the rule rather than the
exception. The woman’s movement, in its short history, has a somewhat
better record than most in this area. One of its major stated goals is
internal democracy – and it goes to (often absurd) lengths to pursue
this goal.

Which is not to claim that it is successful. There is much more rhetoric
than reality on the subject, often disguising hypocritically the same
old games and power plays – often with new and complex feminine
variations. But it is too much to expect that, given its deep roots in
sexual class and family structure, anyone born today would be successful
at eliminating the power psychology. And though it is true that many
females have never assumed the dominant (power over others) role, there
are many others who, identifying all their lives with men, find
themselves in the peculiar position of having to eradicate, at the same
time, not only their submissive natures, but their dominant natures as
well, thus burning their candle at both ends.

But if any revolutionary movement can succeed at establishing an
egalitarian structure, radical feminism will. To question the basic
relations between the sexes and between parents and children is to take
the psychological pattern of dominance-submission to its very roots.
Through examining politically this psychology, feminism will be the
first movement ever to deal in a materialist way with the problem.

3 Freudianism: The Misguided Feminism

If we had to name the one cultural current that most characterizes
America in the twentieth century, it might be the work of Freud and the
disciplines that grew out of it. There is no one who remains unexposed
to his vision of human life, whether through courses in it (‘psych’);
through personal therapy, a common cultural experience for children of
the middle class; or generally, through its pervasion of popular
culture. The new vocabulary has crept into our everyday speech, so that
the ordinary man thinks in terms of being ‘sick’, ‘neurotic’, or
‘psycho’; he checks his ‘id’ periodically for a ‘death wish’, and his
‘ego’ for ‘weakness’; people who reject him are ‘egocentric’; he takes
for granted that he has a ‘castration complex’, that he has ‘repressed’
a desire to sleep with his mother, that he was and maybe still is
engaged in ‘sibling rivalry’, that women ‘envy’ his penis; he is likely
to see every banana or hotdog as a ‘phallic symbol’. His marital
arguments and divorce-court proceedings are conducted in this
psychoanalese. Most of the time he is unclear about what these terms
mean, but if he doesn’t know, at least he is certain that his ‘shrink’
does. The spectacled and goateed little Viennese dozing in his armchair
is a cliché of (nervous) modern humour. It would take some time to
tabulate the number of cartoons that refer to psychoanalysis. We have
built a whole new symbology around the couch alone.

Freudianism has become, with its confessionals and penance, its
proselytes and converts, with the millions spent on its upkeep, our
modern Church. We attack it only uneasily, for you never know, on the
day of final judgement, whether they might be right. Who can be sure
that he is as healthy as he can get? Who is functioning at his highest
capacity? And who not scared out of his wits? Who doesn’t hate his
mother and father? Who doesn’t compete with his brother? What girl at
some time did not wish she were a boy? And for those hardy souls who
persist in their scepticism, there is always that dreadful word
resistance. They are the ones who are sickest: it’s obvious, they fight
it so much.

There has been a backlash. Books have been written, careers have
bloomed, on the contradictions within Freud’s work alone: some have made
a name for themselves simply on one small section of his work (e.g., by
disproving the death wish, or penis envy), and others, braver, or more
ambitious, have attacked the absurdities of the whole. Critical theories
abound at every cocktail party: some intellectuals go so far as to
relate the demise of the intellectual community in America to the
importation of psychoanalysis. In opposition to the religiosity of
Freudianism, a whole empirical school of behaviourism has been founded
(though experimental psychology suffers from its own kind of bias). And
gradually, with all this, Freudian thought has been unwound, its most
essential tenets sloughed off one by one until there is nothing left to
attack.

And yet it does not die. Though psychoanalytic therapy has been proven
ineffective, and Freud’s ideas about women’s sexuality literally proven
wrong (e.g., Masters and Johnson on the myth of the double orgasm), the
old conceptions still circulate. The doctors go on practising. And at
the end of each new critique we find a guilty paean to the Great Father
who started it all. They can’t quite do him in.

But I don’t think it is solely a lack of courage to admit after all
these years that the emperor had no clothes on. I don’t think it is
entirely because they might work themselves out of a job. I think that
in most cases it is the same integrity that made them question it all
that keeps them from destroying it all. ‘Intuitively’ their ‘conscience’
tells them they dare not drop that final axe.

For while it is true that Freud’s theories are not verifiable
empirically, that Freudianism in clinical practice has led to real
absurdities, that in fact as early as 1913 it was noted that
psychoanalysis itself is the disease it purports to cure, creating a new
neurosis in place of the old (we have all observed that those undergoing
therapy seem more preoccupied with themselves than ever before, having
advanced to a state of ‘perceptive’ neurosis now, replete with
‘regressions’, lovesick ‘transferences’, and agonized soliloquies),
still we sense there is something to it. Though those undergoing therapy
are overcome with confusion when asked pointblank ‘Does it help?’ or ‘Is
it worth it?’ it can’t be dismissed entirely.

Freud captured the imagination of a whole continent and civilization for
a good reason. Though on the surface inconsistent, illogical, or ‘way
out’, his followers, with their cautious logic, their experiments and
revisions have nothing comparable to say. Freudianism is so charged, so
impossible to repudiate because Freud grasped the crucial problem of
modern life: sexuality.

I

THE COMMON ROOTS OF FREUDIANISM AND FEMINISM

(I) Freudianism and feminism grew from the same soil. It is no accident
that Freud began his work at the height of the early feminist movement.
We underestimate today how important feminist ideas were at the time.
The parlour conversations about the nature of men and women, the
possibility of artificial reproduction (babies in glass bottles)
recorded in D. H. Lawrence’s Lady Chatterley’s Lover were not imaginary.
Sexism was the hottest topic of the day: Lawrence was merely picking up
on it, adding his own views. Sexism also determined nearly the whole of
G. B. Shaw’s material. Ibsen’s Nora in The Doll’s House was no freak:
such arguments were splitting up many real-life marriages. Henry James’s
nasty description of feminist women in The Bostonians and Virginia
Woolf’s more sympathetic ones in The Years and Night and Day were drawn
from real life. The culture reflected prevailing attitudes and concerns:
feminism was an important literary theme because it was then a vital
problem. For writers wrote about what they saw: they described the
cultural milieu around them. And in this milieu there was concern for
the issues of feminism. The question of the emancipation of women
affected every woman, whether she developed through the new ideas or
fought them desperately. Old films of the time show the growing
solidarity of women, reflecting their unpredictable behaviour, their
terrifying and often disastrous testing of sex roles. No one remained
untouched by the upheaval. And this was not only in the West: Russia at
this time was experimenting at doing away with the family.

At the turn of the century, then, in social and political thinking, in
literary and artistic culture, there was a tremendous ferment of ideas
regarding sexuality, marriage and family, and women’s role. Freudianism
was only one of the cultural products of this ferment. Both Freudianism
and feminism came as reactions to one of the smuggest periods in Western
civilization, the Victorian Era, characterized by its
family-centredness, and thus its exaggerated sexual oppression and
repression. Both movements signified awakening: but Freud was merely a
diagnostician for what feminism purports to cure.

(2) Freudianism and feminism are made of the same stuff. Freud’s
achievement was the rediscovery of sexuality. Freud saw sexuality as the
prime life force; the way in which this libido was organized in the
child determined the psychology of the individual (which, moreover,
re-created that of the historic species). He found that in order to
adjust to present civilization the sexuate being must undergo a
repression process in childhood. While every individual undergoes this
repression, some undergo it less successfully than others, producing
greater (psychosis) or lesser (neurosis) maladjustment, often severe
enough to cripple the individual altogether.

Freud’s proposed remedy is less significant, and indeed has caused
actual damage: by a process of bringing to the surface the crippling
repressions, of conscious recognition and open examination, the patient
is supposed to be able to come to terms with, to consciously reject,
rather than subconsciously repress, the troubling wishes of the id. This
therapy process is entered into with the help of a psychoanalyst through
‘transference’, in which the psychoanalyst substitutes for the original
authority figure at the origins of the repressive neurosis. Like
religious healing or hypnosis (which, indeed, Freud studied and was much
influenced by), ‘transference’ proceeds by emotional involvement rather
than by reason. The patient ‘falls in love’ with his analyst; by
‘projecting’ the problem on to the supposedly blank page of the
therapeutic relationship, he draws it out in order to be cured of it.
Only it doesn’t work.[1](#part0017.html#chapter3-1)

For Freud, in the tradition of ‘pure’ science, observed psychological
structures without ever questioning their social context. Given his own
psychic structure and cultural prejudices – he was a petty tyrant of the
old school, for whom certain sexual truths may have been expensive – he
can hardly have been expected to make such an examination part of his
life work. (Wilhelm Reich was one of the few who followed that path.) In
addition, just as Marx could not take fully into account the future
advent of cybernetics. Freud then did not have the mindbending knowledge
of technological possibility that we now have. But whether or not we can
blame Freud personally, his failure to question society itself was
responsible for massive confusion in the disciplines that grew up around
this theory. Beset with the insurmountable problems that resulted from
trying to put into practice a basic contradiction – the resolution of a
problem within the environment that created it – his followers began to
attack one component after another of his theory, until they had thrown
the baby out with the bath.

But was there any value in these ideas? Let us re-examine some of them
once again, this time from a radical feminist view. I believe Freud was
talking about something real, though perhaps his ideas, taken literally,
lead to absurdity – for his genius was poetic rather than scientific;
his ideas are more valuable as metaphors than as literal truths.

In this light let us first examine the Oedipus
Complex,[2](#part0017.html#chapter3-2) a cornerstone of Freudian theory,
in which the male child is said to want to possess his mother sexually
and to kill his father, fear of castration by the father forcing him to
repress this wish. Freud himself said in his last book, ‘I venture to
assert that if psychoanalysis could boast of no other achievement than
the discovery of the repressed Oedipus Complex, that alone would give it
claim to be counted among the precious new acquisitions of mankind.’
Contrast this with Andrew Salter in The Case Against Psychoanalysis:

Even those most sympathetic to Freud find the contradictions in the
Oedipus Complex somewhat confusing. Says the Psychiatric Dictionary of
the passing of the Oedipus Complex, ‘The fate of the Oedipus Complex is
not yet clearly understood.’ I think we can talk with certainty about
the fate of the Oedipus Complex. The fate of the Oedipus Complex will be
the fate of alchemy, phrenology, and palmistry. The fate of the Oedipus
Complex will be oblivion.

For Salter is plagued by all the usual contradictions in a theory that
assumes the social context, the cause of the complex, to be immutable:

Freud’s thought about the ‘normal’ disappearance of the Oedipus Complex
suffers from a critical inconsistency in logic. If we grant that the
disappearance of the Oedipus Complex is achieved through castration
fear, does it not appear as if normality is acquired as a result of fear
and repression exerted on the boy? And is not the achievement of mental
health by repression in flagrant contradiction of the most elementary
Freudian doctrines? (Italics mine)

I submit that the only way that the Oedipus Complex can make full sense
is in terms of power. We must keep in mind that Freud observed this
complex as common to every normal individual who grows up in the nuclear
family of a patriarchal society, a form of social organization that
intensifies the worst effects of the inequalities inherent in the
biological family itself. There is some evidence to prove that the
effects of the Oedipus Complex decrease in societies where males hold
less power, and that the weakening of patriarchalism produces many
cultural changes that perhaps can be traced to this relaxation.

Let us take a look at this patriarchal nuclear family in which the
Oedipus Complex appears so markedly. In the prototypical family of this
kind the man is the breadwinner; all other members of this family are
thus his dependents. He agrees to support a wife in return for her
services: housekeeping, sex, and reproduction. The children whom she
bears for him are even more dependent. They are legally the property of
the father (one of the first campaigns of the early WRM was against the
deprivation of women, upon divorce, of their children), whose duty it is
to feed them and educate them, to ‘mould’ them to take their place in
whatever class of society to which he belongs. In return for this he
expects that continuation of name and property which is often confused
with immortality. His rights over them are complete. If he is not a kind
father/master, tough luck. They cannot escape his clutches until they
are grown, and by then the psychological moulding has been accomplished:
they are now ready to repeat his performance.

It is important to remember that more recent versions of the nuclear
family, though they may blur this essential relationship beyond
recognition, reproduce essentially the same triangle of dependencies:
father, mother, son. For even if the woman is equally educated, even
when she is working (we need to be reminded that until the hard-won
advances of the WRM of Freud’s time women were not educated, nor could
they find jobs), she is rarely able, given the inequality of the job
market, to make as much money as her husband (and woe betide the
marriage in which she does). But even if she could, later, when she
bears children and takes care of infants, she is once again totally
incapacitated. To make both women and children totally independent would
be to eliminate not just the patriarchal nuclear family, but the
biological family itself.

This then is the oppressive climate in which the normal child grows up.
From the beginning he is sensitive to the hierarchy of power. He knows
that in every way, physically, economically, emotionally, he is
completely dependent on, thus at the mercy of, his two parents, whoever
they may be. Between the two of them, though, he will certainly prefer
his mother. He has a bond with her in oppression: while he is oppressed
by both parents, she, at least, is oppressed by one. The father, so far
as the child can see, is in total control. (‘Just you wait till your
father gets home from the office. Boy, will you get a spanking!’) The
child then senses that his mother is half-way between authority and
helplessness. He can run to his father if his mother tries anything
unjust; but if his father beats him there is little his mother can offer
except tea and sympathy. If his mother is sensitive to injustice, she
may use her wiles and tears to spare him. But he uses wiles and tears
himself at that age, and he knows that tears don’t compare to solid
force. Their effectiveness, at any rate, is limited, dependent on many
variables (‘bad day at the office’). Whereas physical force or the
threat of it is a sure bet.

In the traditional family there exists a parental polarity: the mother
is expected to love the child devotedly, even unconditionally, whereas
the father, on the other hand, seldom takes an active interest in
infants – certainly not in their intimate care – and later, when the son
is older, loves him conditionally, in response to performance and
achievement. Erich Fromm in The Art of Loving:

We have already spoken about motherly love. Motherly love is by its very
nature unconditional. Mother loves the newborn infant because it is her
child, not because the child has fulfilled any specific condition, or
lived up to any specific expectation … The relationship to the father is
quite different. Mother is the home we come from, she is nature, soil,
the ocean; father does not represent any such natural home. He has
little connection with the child in the first years of its life, and his
importance for the child in this early period cannot be compared with
that of the mother. But while father does not represent the natural
world, he represents the other pole of human existence; the world of
thought, of man-made things, of law and order, of discipline, of travel
and adventure. Father is the one who teaches the child, who shows him
the road into the world … Fatherly love is conditional love. Its
principle is ‘I love you because you fulfil my expectations, because you
do your duty, because you are like me’… In this development from
mother-centred to father-centred attachment, and their eventual
synthesis, lies the basis for mental health and the achievement of
maturity.

If this were not the case when he wrote it, it certainly would be by
now: Fromm’s book on love has been translated into seventeen languages,
selling – as it says on the jacket – 1,500,000 copies in English alone.
Later on I shall deal in greater detail with the nature of mother love
that such a quote espouses, and the kind of damage such an ideal does to
both mother and child. Here I’ll try to show only in what way this
traditional polarity relates to the Oedipus Complex.

Freud, unlike others, did not underestimate what goes on in a child
before the age of six. If an infant’s basic needs are taken care of by
his mother, if he is fed, dressed, and coddled by her, if he is loved by
her ‘unconditionally’ as opposed to ‘conditionally’ by his father –
seldom seeing him and then only for punishment or ‘manly approval’ – and
if moreover he senses that he and his mother are united against the more
powerful father whom they both must please and appease, then it is true
that every normal male first identifies with the female.

As for desiring his mother – yes, this too. But it is absurd what
Freud’s literalism can lead to. The child does not actively dream of
penetrating his mother. Chances are he cannot yet even imagine how one
would go about such an act. Nor is he physically developed enough to
have a need for orgasmic release. It would be more correct to view this
sexual need in a generalized, more negative fashion: that is, only
later, due to the structuring of the family around the incest taboo,
must the sexual separate from other kinds of physical and emotional
responses. At first they are integrated.

What happens at the age of six when the boy is suddenly expected to
start ‘shaping up’, acting like a little man? Words like ‘male
identification’ and ‘father image’ are thrown around. Last year’s cuddly
toys are snatched away. He is led out to start playing baseball. Trucks
and electric trains multiply. If he cries he is called a ‘sissy’; if he
runs to his mother, a ‘mama’s boy’. Father suddenly takes an active
interest in him (‘You spoiled him’). The boy fears his father, rightly.
He knows that between the two of them, his mother is far more on his
side. In most cases he has already observed very clearly that his father
makes his mother unhappy, makes her cry, doesn’t talk to her very much,
argues with her a lot, bullies (this is why, if he has seen intercourse,
he is likely to interpret it on the basis of what he has already
gathered of the relationship: that is, that his father is attacking his
mother). However, suddenly now he’s expected to identify with this
brutish stranger. Of course he doesn’t want to. He resists. He starts
dreaming of bogeymen. He becomes afraid of his shadow. He cries when he
goes to the barber. He expects his father to cut off his penis: he’s not
behaving like the Little Man he had better learn to be.

This is his ‘difficult transitional phase’. What finally convinces the
normal child to reverse his identification? Fromm puts it so well:

But while father does not represent the natural world, he represents the
other pole of human existence; the world of thought, of man-made things,
of law and order, of discipline, of travel and adventure. Father is the
one who teaches the child, who shows him the road into the world …

What finally convinces him is the offer of the world when he grows up.
He is asked to make a transition from the state of the powerless, women
and children, to the state of the potentially powerful, son (ego
extension) of his father. Most children aren’t fools. They don’t plan to
be stuck with the lousy limited lives of women. They want that travel
and adventure. But it is hard. Because deep down they have a contempt
for the father with all his power. They sympathize with their mother.
But what can they do? They ‘repress’ their deep emotional attachment to
their mother, ‘repress’ their desire to kill their father, and emerge
into the honourable state of manhood.

It is no wonder that such a transition leaves an emotional residue, a
‘complex’. The male child, in order to save his own hide, has had to
abandon and betray his mother and join ranks with her oppressor. He
feels guilty. His emotions towards women in general are affected. Most
men have made an all-too-beautiful transition into power over others;
some are still trying.

Other components of Freudian theory open up just as well when examined
in power, i.e. political, terms; the antidote of feminism cancels the
sex bias that produced the initial distortion.

It is generally believed that the Electra Complex is less profound a
discovery than the Oedipus Complex, because, like all Freud’s theories
about women, it analyses the female only as negative male: the Electra
Complex is an inverse Oedipus Complex. The Electra Complex, with its
interwoven castration complex, is briefly as follows: the little girl,
just like the little boy, begins with a fixation on the mother. Towards
the age of five, when she discovers that she has no penis, she begins to
feel castrated. To compensate, she tries to make an alliance with her
father through seduction, thus developing a rivalry with, and a
subsequent hostility to, her mother. The superego develops in response
to repression by the father: but because he is the object of her
seduction, he does not repress her as he does his son, who is his sexual
rival for the affection of the mother, and thus the young girl’s basic
psychic organization differs from, is weaker than, that of her brother.
A girl who persists in strongly identifying with her father is said to
be retarded at the ‘clitoral’ stage of female sexuality, likely to be
frigid or a lesbian.

The most remarkable feature of this description, restated in feminist
terms, is that the little girl, also, is first attached to her mother
(which, incidentally, disproved a biologically determined
heterosexuality). Like the little boy, the little girl loves her mother
more than her father, and for precisely the same reasons: the mother
cares for her more closely than the father, and shares her oppression
with her. At about the age of five, along with the boy, she consciously
begins to observe the father’s greater power, his access to that
interesting wider world that is denied her mother. At this point she
rejects her mother as dull and familiar, and begins to identify with her
father. The situation is complicated further if she has brothers, for
then she observes that the father is more than willing to allow her
brother to share his world, his power, and yet that world is still
denied her. She now has two alternatives: (I) Realistically sizing up
the situation, she can start using female wiles for all they’re worth in
the attempt to rob the father of his power (she will then have to
compete with her mother for the favours of the powerful) or (2) She can
refuse to believe that the physical difference between her and her
brother will forever imply a corresponding power inequity. In this case
she rejects everything identified with her mother, i.e. servility and
wiles, the psychology of the oppressed, and imitates doggedly everything
she has seen her brother do that gains for him the kind of freedom and
approval she is seeking. (Notice I do not say she pretends masculinity.
These traits are not sexually determined.) But though she tries
desperately to gain her father’s favour by behaving more and more in the
manner in which he has openly encouraged her brother to behave, it
doesn’t work for her. She tries harder. She becomes a tomboy – and is
flattered to be called one. This obstinacy in the face of an unpalatable
reality may even succeed. For a time. Until puberty perhaps. Then she is
really stuck. She can no longer deny her sex: it is confirmed by lustful
males all around her. This is when she often develops a female
identification, with a vengeance. (Teenage girls, so ‘difficult’,
‘secretive’, ‘giggly’; with boys it’s the brat stage.)

As for the ‘penis envy’, again it is safer to view this as a metaphor.
Even when an actual preoccupation with genitals does occur it is clear
that anything that physically distinguishes the envied male will be
envied. For the girl can’t really understand how it is that when she
does exactly the same thing as her brother, his behaviour is approved
and hers isn’t. She may or may not make a confused connection between
his behaviour and the organ that differentiates him. Her hostility
towards her mother is, again, only possibly tied up with an observed
genital similarity: anything that identifies her with the mother she is
trying so hard to reject is also rejected. But that a small girl on her
own will see herself as of the same sex as her mother is much less
likely than that she will see herself as asexual. She may even be proud
of it. After all, she has no obvious protrusions, like the breasts that
mark the female for her. And as for her genitals, her innocent slit
appears to bear no resemblance to the hairy mound that her mother has:
she is seldom even aware that she has a vagina because it is sealed. Her
body as yet is as limber and functional as her brother’s, and she is at
one with it: they are only equally oppressed by the greater strength of
adults. Without specific direction, she could fool herself a long time
that she will not end up like her mother. This is why she is so
encouraged to play with dolls, to ‘play house’, to be pretty and
attractive. It is hoped that she will not be one of those to fight off
her role till the last minute. It is hoped she will slip into it early,
by persuasion, artificially, rather than by necessity; that the abstract
promise of a baby will be enough of a lure to substitute for that
exciting world of ‘travel and adventure’.[3](#part0017.html#chapter3-3)

In the light of this feminist interpretation, many peripheral Freudian
doctrines that had seemed absurd now make sense. For example, Ernest
Jones, in Papers on Psychoanalysis:

With very many children there is a lively desire to become the parents
of their own parents … This curious construction of the imagination … is
evidently closely connected with incestuous wishes, since it is an
exaggerated form of the commoner desire to be one’s own father.

Feminist translation: children fantasy being in a position of power over
their parent masters, particularly the one who has really got the power:
father.

Or, here is Freud on fetishism: ‘The object is the substitute for the
mother’s phallus which the little boy believed in and does not wish to
forego.’ Really, Freud can be embarrassing. Wouldn’t it be a lot more
sensible to talk about the mother’s power? Chances are the little boy
has not even seen his mother undressed, let alone closely observed the
difference between the penis and the clitoris. What he does not know is
that he is attached to his mother and does not want to reject her on the
grounds of her powerlessness. The chosen object is merely the symbol of
this attachment.

Other such examples are abundant, but I have made my point: with a
feminist analysis the whole structure of Freudianism – for the first
time – makes thorough sense, clarifying such important related areas as
homosexuality, even the nature of the repressive incest taboo itself –
two causally related subjects which have been laboured for a long time
with little unanimity. We can understand them, finally, only as symptoms
of the power psychology created by the family.

Durkheim, at the turn of the century, with his foundation work on
incest, like Freud, triggered off a train of contradictory opinion that
has lasted till our present day. Durkheim thought that the incest taboo
originated in the structure of the clan:

\[Many facts tend to prove\] that at the beginning of human societies,
incest was not forbidden until division into at least two primary clans;
for the first form of this prohibition that we know, namely exogamy,
seems above all to be correlative to this organization. The latter is
certainly not primitive.

And:

As the basic structure of the clan was a stage through which all human
societies seem to have passed, and exogamy was strictly linked to the
constitution of the clan, it is not surprising that the moral state the
clan inspired and left behind it was itself general throughout humanity.
At least it was necessary in order to triumph over it, to have
particularly pressing social necessities; and this explains both how
incest was legitimized among certain peoples and why these people
remained the exception.

Once the family had become the centre of religious moralism, and all
free passions had come to be tied up outside it, with women and sex, the
taboo against incest became firmly established, self-perpetuating. For:

by the time the origins of this duality (between morality and passion)
disappeared, it was firmly entrenched in the culture. The entire moral
life had been organized as a result of this development: it would have
been necessary to overthrow the whole morality to return to the previous
status.

Durkheim adds, strikingly, ‘Without the origins in exogamy, passion and
love between the sexes would not have become synonymous.’

So that to eliminate the incest taboo we would have to eliminate the
family, and sexuality as it is now structured.

Not such a bad idea. For this traditional and by now almost universal
proscription on incest has caused us to accept as ‘normal’ a sexuality
in which individual potential remains unfulfilled, Freud described the
psychological penalties of sexual repression caused by the incest taboo,
discovering particularly the existence of the Oedipus Complex in every
normal male child, and its counterpart, the Electra, in every normal
female.

Homosexuality is only what happens when these repressions don’t ‘take’
as they ought to – that is, rather than being thoroughly suppressed,
allowing the individual to at least function in society, they remain on
the surface, seriously crippling that individual’s sexual relationships,
or even his total psyche. A system in which the first person to whom the
child responds emotionally will require of him that he repress a
substantial part of those responses is bound to misfire most of the
time. As Ruth Hirschberger notes in Adam’s Rib:

It is significant that the same woman who awakens the boy’s affection
(and few deny the sexual component in all demonstrativeness) is also the
first to issue the taboo against his sexuality … Suppression of
sexuality becomes the ticket to the mother’s affection.

Or, male homosexuality could result from the refusal by the child at
five or six to make the transition from ‘mother-centredness’ to
‘father-centredness’ – often from a genuine love for the mother and a
real contempt for the father. (In the case of the missing ‘father
figure’, such a transition is never clearly demanded of the child.) Very
often, it is true, given the war between the sexes as it presents itself
in most marriages, the mother encourages such an attachment out of
spite, to get even with the father by denying him the progeny for the
sake of which he tolerates her. But I think it would be more accurate to
say that the child has simply taken the place of the indifferent, often
philandering father in her affections. Every mother, even the most ‘well
adjusted’, is expected to make motherhood a central focus of her life.
Often the child is her only substitute for all that she has been denied
in the larger world, in Freud’s terms, her ‘penis’ substitute. How can
we then demand that she not be ‘possessive’, that she give up suddenly,
without a struggle – to the world of ‘travel and adventure’ – the very
son who was meant to compensate her for her lifelong loss of this world?

Female homosexuality, though it too has its sources in unsuccessful
repression (the Electra Complex), is considerably more complicated.
Remember that the little girl also is first attached to her mother. She
may never, out of later rivalry, learn to repress this attachment. Or
she may attempt to act like a boy also in order to win her mother’s
approval (unfortunately women, too, prefer male children). Conversely,
in cases where she does identify very strongly with her father, she may
refuse to give up the desired male privilege even beyond puberty; in
extreme cases she imagines herself really to be the male whose part she
is playing.

And even those women who appear to be sexually adjusted seldom really
are. We must remember that a woman can go through intercourse with
almost no response; a man can’t. Though few women, due to the excessive
pressure on them to conform, actually repudiate their sexual role
altogether by becoming actively lesbian, this does not mean that most
women are sexually fulfilled by interaction with men. (However, a
damaged female sexuality is relatively harmless in social terms; whereas
the male sexual sickness, the confusion of sexuality with power, hurts
others.) This is one reason why in Victorian society as well as a long
time before and after, including today, women’s interest in sex is less
than men’s. This fact is so bafflingly obvious that it led a well-known
psychoanalyst, Theodor Reik, to conclude (in 1966!) ‘that the very
sexual drive itself is masculine, even in women, because on a lower
evolutionary level reproduction is possible without males’.

Thus we see that in a family-based society, repressions due to the
incest taboo make a totally fulfilled sexuality impossible for anyone,
and a well-functioning sexuality possible for only a few. Homosexuals in
our time are only the extreme casualties of the system of obstructed
sexuality that develops in the family. But though homosexuality at
present is as limited and sick as our heterosexuality, a day may soon
come in which a healthy transexuality would be the norm. For if we grant
that the sexual drive is at birth diffuse and undifferentiated from the
total personality (Freud’s ‘polymorphous perversity’) and, as we have
seen, becomes differentiated only in response to the incest taboo; and
that, furthermore, the incest taboo is now necessary only in order to
preserve the family; then if we did away with the family we would in
effect be doing away with the repressions that mould sexuality into
specific formations. All other things being equal, people might still
prefer those of the opposite sex simply because it is physically more
convenient. But even this is a large assumption. For if sexuality were
indeed at no time separated from other responses, if one individual
responded to the other in a total way that merely included sexuality as
one of its components, then it is unlikely that a purely physical factor
could be decisive. However, we have no way of knowing that now.

The end of the compartmentalization of personality through reintegration
of the sexual with the whole could have important cultural side-effects.
At the present time the Oedipus Complex, originating in the now almost
universal incest taboo, demands that the child soon distinguish between
the ‘emotional’ and the ‘sexual’: one is considered by the father to be
an appropriate response to the mother, the other is not. If the child is
to gain his mother’s love he must separate out the sexual from his other
feelings (Freud’s ‘aim-inhibited’ relationships). One cultural
development that proceeds directly from such an unnatural psychological
dichotomy is the good/bad women syndrome, with which whole cultures are
diseased. That is, the personality split is projected outwards on to the
class ‘women’: those who resemble the mother are ‘good’, and
consequently one must not have sexual feelings towards them; those
unlike the mother, who don’t call forth a total response, are sexual,
and therefore ‘bad’. Whole classes of people, e.g., prostitutes, pay
with their lives for this dichotomy; others suffer to different degrees.
A good portion of our language degrades women to the level where it is
permissible to have sexual feelings for them. (‘Cunt. Your brain is
between your legs.’) This sexual schizophrenia is rarely overcome
totally in the individual. And in the larger culture, whole historical
developments, the history of art and literature itself, have been
directly moulded by it. Thus the courtly honour of the Middle Ages,
exalting women only at the expense of their flesh-and-blood humanity –
making sex a lowly act, divorced from true love – developed into
Marcianism, the cult of the virgin in art and poetry.

A song from the period illustrates the division:

I care not for these ladies

Who must be wooed and prayed,

Give me kind Amaryllis,

The wanton country maid,

Nature Art disdaineth,

Her beauty is her own,

For when we hug and kiss she cries

‘Forsooth, let us go’

But when we come where comfort is

She never will say no.

The separation of sex from emotion is at the very foundations of Western
culture and civilization. If early sexual repression is the basic
mechanism by which character structures supporting political,
ideological, and economic serfdom are produced, then an end to the
incest taboo, through abolition of the family, would have profound
effects: sexuality would be released from its straitjacket to eroticize
our whole culture, changing its very definition.

\*   \*   \*

To summarize briefly my second point, that Freud and feminism dealt with
the same material: Freud’s fundamental hypothesis, the nature of the
libido and its conflict with the reality principle, makes a great deal
more sense when seen against the social backdrop of the (patriarchal
nuclear) family. I have attempted to reanalyse in feminist terms those
components of Freud’s theory that most directly relate to sexuality and
its repression within the family system: the incest taboo and the
resulting Oedipus and Electra Complexes, and their common misfiring into
sexual malfunctioning, or, in severe cases, into what is now sexual
deviation. I have pointed out that this sexual repression, demanded of
every individual in the interests of family integrity, makes not only
for individual neurosis, but also for widespread cultural illnesses.

Admittedly more than a sketchy presentation is beyond the scope of this
chapter: a thorough restatement of Freud in feminist terms would make a
valuable book in itself. Here I have submitted only that Freudianism and
feminism sprang up at the same time, in response to the same stimuli,
and that essentially they are made of the same substance: in carefully
examining the basic tenets of Freudianism, I have shown that these are
also the raw material of feminism. The difference lies only in that
radical feminism does not accept the social context in which repression
(and the resulting neurosis) must develop as immutable. If we dismantle
the family, the subjection of ‘pleasure’ to ‘reality’, i.e. sexual
repression, has lost its function; and is no longer necessary.

II

FREUDIANISM SUBSUMES FEMINISM

To the two main points of this chapter, first, that Freudianism and
feminism grew out of the same historical conditions, and second, that
Freudianism and feminism are based on the same set of realities, I shall
add a third: Freudianism subsumed the place of feminism as the lesser of
two evils.

We have shown how Freudianism hit the same nerve that feminism did: both
at once were responses to centuries of increasing privatization of
family life, its extreme subjugation of women, and the sex repressions
and subsequent neuroses this caused. Freud too was once considered a sex
maniac, destructive to society – he was ridiculed and despised as much
as were the militant feminists. It was only much later that Freudianism
became as sacred as an established religion. How did this reversal come
about?

Let us first consider the social context of the development of both
feminism and Freudianism. We have seen that the ideas of the early
radical feminists contained the seeds of the coming sexual revolution.
We have seen that though in many cases the feminists themselves did not
clearly grasp the importance of what they had stumbled into, though
often they did not have down a thorough and consistent radical feminist
critique of society – and given the political climate at that time, it
is no wonder – the reaction of society to them indicates that their
enemies knew what they were about, if they themselves weren’t sure: the
virulent antifeminist literature of the time, often written by men well
respected and honest in their own fields of endeavour, illustrates the
threat the feminists presented to the establishment. I have also shown
in the past chapter how the movement was redirected into an
all-consuming effort to obtain the vote, and how in this way it was
sidetracked and destroyed. Following the end of the feminist movement,
with the granting of the vote, came the era of the flappers, an era that
in its pseudo-liberated sexuality much resembles our own. The widespread
female rebellion stirred up by the feminist movement now had nowhere to
go. Girls who had cut their hair, shortened their skirts, and gone off
to college no longer had a political direction for their frustration;
instead they danced it away in marathons, or expended themselves
swimming the Channel and flying aeroplanes across the Atlantic. They
were a roused class who did not know what to do with their
consciousness. They were told then as we are still told now, ‘You’ve got
civil rights, short skirts, and sexual liberty. You’ve won your
revolution. What more do you want?’ But the ‘revolution’ had been won
within a system organized around the patriarchal nuclear family. And as
Herbert Marcuse in Eros and Civilization shows, within such a repressive
structure only a more sophisticated repression can result (‘repressive
de-sublimation’).

In a repressive society, individual happiness and productive development
are in contradiction to society; if they are defined as values to be
realized within the society, they become themselves repressive … \[The
concept of repressive de-sublimation is\] the release of sexuality in
modes and forms which reduce and weaken erotic energy. In this process
sexuality spreads into formerly tabooed dimensions and relations.
However, instead of recreating these dimensions and relations in the
images of the Pleasure Principle, the opposite tendency asserts itself:
the Reality Principle extends its hold over Eros. The most telling
illustration is provided by the methodical introduction of sexiness into
business, politics, propaganda, etc.

Here in the twenties began the stereotypes of the American ‘career
girl’, the ‘coed’, and the ‘butchy’ businesswoman. This image of the
supposedly ‘liberated’ woman went around the world via Hollywood, the
unbalancing effects on women of pseudo-liberation giving antifeminists
new ammunition, and further bolstering the resistance of the still
openly male supremacist societies to setting ‘their’ women free. (‘We
like our women the way they are – womanly.’) American servicemen came
back from the Second World War with stories of those great continental
women who still knew how to make a man feel good. The word castration
began to circulate. And finally in America, in the forties, Freudianism
came in big.

Meanwhile, Freudianism itself had undergone deep internal changes.
Emphasis had shifted from the original psychoanalytic theory to clinical
practice. In the final chapter of Eros and Civilization, Marcuse
discusses the reactionary implications of this shift, showing how the
contradiction between Freud’s ideas and the possibility of any effective
‘therapy’ based on them – psychoanalysis cannot effect individual
happiness in a society the structure of which can tolerate no more than
severely controlled individual happiness – finally caused the
assimilation of the theory to suit the practice:

The most speculative and ‘metaphysical’ concepts not subject to clinical
verification … were minimized and discarded altogether. Moreover, in the
process, some of Freud’s most decisive concepts (such as the relation
between the id and the ego, the function of the unconscious, and the
scope and significance of sexuality) were redefined in such a way that
their explosive content was all but eliminated … The revisionists have
converted the weakening of Freud’s theory into a new theory.

The term that perhaps best characterizes this neo-Freudian revisionism
is ‘adjustment’. But adjustment to what? The underlying assumption is
that one must accept the reality in which one finds oneself. But what
happens if one is a woman, a black, or a member of any other especially
unfortunate class of society? Then one is doubly unlucky. Then one not
only has to achieve a normalcy that even for the privileged is, as we
have shown, difficult and precarious at best, but one must also ‘adjust’
to the specific racism or sexism that limits one’s potential from the
very beginning. One must abandon all attempts at self-definition or
determination. Thus, in Marcuse’s view, the process of therapy becomes
merely ‘a course in resignation’, the difference between health and
neurosis only ‘the degree and effectiveness of the resignation’. For, as
in the often-quoted statement of Freud to his patient (Studies in
Hysteria, 1895), ‘\[A great deal will be gained if we succeed through
therapy in\] transforming your hysterical misery into everyday
unhappiness.’

And as all those who have undergone therapy can attest, that’s just
about the size of it. Cleaver’s description of his analysis in Soul on
Ice speaks for the experience of any other oppressed person as well:

I had several sessions with a psychiatrist. His conclusion was that I
hated my mother. How he arrived at this conclusion I’ll never know
because he knew nothing about my mother, and when he’d ask me questions
I would answer him with absurd lies. What revolted me about him was that
he had heard me denouncing whites, yet each time he deliberately guided
the conversation back to my family life, to my childhood. That in itself
was alright, but he deliberately blocked all my attempts to bring out
the racial question, and he made it clear that he was not interested in
my attitudes towards whites. This was a Pandora’s box he did not care to
open.

Theodor Reik, perhaps the prototype of the crackerbarrel layman’s Freud,
exemplifies the crassness and insensitivity of most psychoanalysts to
the real problems of their patients. It is remarkable that, with so many
writings on the emotional differences between men and women, Reik should
never have discovered the objective difference in their social
situations. For example, he observes in passing differences like the
following without ever drawing the right conclusions:

Little girls sometimes whisper to each other ‘Men do’ this or that.
Little boys almost never speak of women in this way.

A woman gives much more thought to being a woman than a man to being a
man.

Most women, when they ask a favour of a man, smile. In the same
situation men rarely smile.

To be a ladies’ man means somewhere not to be much of a man.

Almost all women are afraid that the man they love will leave them. But
hardly a man is afraid that a woman will leave him.

Women in groups sometimes say, ‘My lord and master let me out of the
house tonight.’ Men say, ‘My ball-and-chain.’

And here is a random sampling of his neo-Freudian contributions to
sexual understanding:

The first impression one gets of a young woman entering a room full of
people is that of concealed or well-disguised insecurity. It seems that
being the possessor of a penis protects men against such over
self-awareness.

Men are not at home in the universe and therefore have to explore it.
Women who form the chain of all organic beings are at home in the world
and do not feel the urge to find out all about it.

It seems to me that psychoanalytic research in emphasizing the physical
deficiency in the genitals region which the little girl experiences has
neglected the aesthetic value and its significance in the development of
the feminine attitude. I assume that the little girl who compares her
genitals to those of the little boy finds her own ugly. Not only the
greater modesty of women, but their never ceasing striving towards
beautifying and adorning their bodies is to be understood as
displacement and extension of their effort to overcompensate for their
original impression that their genitals are ugly.

I believe that cleanliness has a double origin: the first in the taboos
of tribes, and the second another matter coming thousands of years
later, namely in women’s awareness of their own odor, specifically the
bad smells caused by the secretion of their genitals.

And a typical therapeutic interpretation:

\[A patient was afraid to show me her book.\] It occurred to me: this
patient, who had during the preceding transference shown clear
indications of transference love for me, now acts as if the book were a
child she had gotten by me. She acts the way a woman does who has to
show her child to her husband for the first time. She is afraid he might
not like the newborn baby.

It reads like a Freudian jokebook.

Reik’s female patients, in contrast, were often touchingly perceptive,
even brilliantly astute. They were far more in touch with the reality of
their situation than he was ever able to be:

A woman seems incapable of expressing her strong negative feelings and
explains her incapacity in a psychoanalytic session: ‘I am afraid to
show these emotions because if I did, it would be like opening Pandora’s
box … I am afraid that my aggressiveness would destroy all.’

Before she left I took her to the window and showed her the stores
across the street, and their signs in neon letters, and said, ‘Isn’t it
a woman’s world?’ But she was not much impressed by this and replied,
‘Walk down Wall Street and you’ll see it’s a man’s world.’

\[A patient notes that\] Men are odd. They do not permit us to be only
women, I mean women with all their weaknesses; but they do not for a
moment let us forget that we are only women.

How can these women stand Reik’s stupid misogyny? They can’t:

When I told a patient in her forties that she had wanted to be a boy
like her brother she began to curse and abuse me, saying ‘Fuck you’ and
‘Go to hell!’ and other unladylike expressions.

But the doctor wins:

When it was time for her to leave, she stood for a while longer than
usual before the mirror in my anteroom, putting her hair in order. I
smilingly remarked, ‘I am glad to see a remnant of femininity.’

Here are a few other female reactions:

When you listen to me a long time without saying anything, I often have
the impression that what I say is silly woman’s stuff and without value.
It is as if you do not consider it worth your while to speak to me.

Woman criticizing her psychoanalyst: ‘Even your spontaneity is
artificial.’

The patient had been silent for a longer time than usual and then said
in a quiet manner: ‘Goddam, I don’t know why I am here. Go fuck
yourself!’

It is not that these women were unaware of their situation: on the
contrary, they were in Reik’s office because of their awareness. There
was no other way to handle their frustration because there is no way to
handle it, short of revolution.

We have arrived at our final point: the importation of clinical
Freudianism to stem the flow of feminism. Girls in the twenties and
thirties found themselves half-way in and half-way out of the
traditional roles. Thus they were neither insulated and protected from
the larger world as before, nor were they equipped to deal with it. Both
their personal and work lives suffered. Their frustration often took
hysterical forms, complicated by the fact that they were despised the
world over for even the little false liberation they had achieved. Mass
confusion sent them in droves to the psychoanalysts. And where had all
the psychoanalysts come from? By this time a war was going on in Europe,
and much of the German and Austrian intelligentsia had settled here in
search of a practice. It was ideal: a whole class of suffering people
awaited them. And it was not just a few bored, rich women who were
sucked into the new religion. For America was undergoing serious cramps
from withholding a sexual revolution already well beyond the beginning
stages. Everyone suffered, men as well as women. Books came out with
such titles as How to Live with a Neurotic (because that oppressed class
is right there in your kitchen, whining and complaining and nagging).
Soon men, too, were turning up at the psychoanalysts’. Well-educated,
responsible citizens, not just psychos. And children. Whole new fields
were opened to deal with the influx: child psychology, clinical
psychology, group therapy, marriage counselling services, any variation
you can think of, name it and there it was. And none of it was enough.
The demand multiplied faster than new departments could be opened up in
colleges.

That these new departments were soon filled up with women is no wonder.
Masses of searching women studied psychology with a passion in the hope
of finding a solution to their ‘hangups’. But women who had grown
interested in psychology because its raw material touched them where
they lived soon were spouting jargon about marital adjustment and
sex-role responsibility. Psychology departments became half-way houses
to send women scurrying back ‘adjusted’ to their traditional roles as
wives and mothers. Those women who persisted in demanding careers became
in their turn instruments of the repressive educational system, their
new-found psychological ‘insight’ – that babble of Child Psych., Social
Work 301 and El. Ed. – serving to keep a fresh generation of women and
children down. Psychology became reactionary to its core, its potential
as a serious discipline undermined by its usefulness to those in power.

And psychology was not the only new discipline to be corrupted.
Education, social work, sociology, anthropology, all the related
behavioural sciences, remained for years pseudo-sciences, overburdened
with a double function: the indoctrination of women, as well as the
study of ‘human behaviour’. Reactionary schools of thought developed:
social science became ‘functional’, studying the operation of
institutions only within the given value system, thus promoting
acceptance of the status quo.

It is not surprising that these remained ‘women’s fields’. Men soon fled
to (exclusively male) ‘pure’ science; women, still only semi-educated,
awed with their new entrance into academia, were left to be snowed with
the pseudo-scientific bullshit. For, in addition to role indoctrination,
the behavioural sciences served as a dyke to keep the hordes of questing
nouveaux intellectuelles from entering the ‘real’ sciences – physics,
engineering, biochemistry, etc., sciences that in a technological
society bore an increasingly direct relation to control of that society.

As a result, even access to higher education, one of the few victories
of the early WRM, was subverted. More average women went to college than
ever before, with less effect. Often the only difference between the
modern college-educated housewife and her traditional prototype was the
jargon she used in describing her marital hell.

\*   \*   \*

In short, Freudian theory, regroomed for its new function of ‘social
adjustment’, was used to wipe up the feminist revolt. Patching up with
band-aids the casualties of the aborted feminist revolution, it
succeeded in quieting the immense social unrest and role confusion that
followed in the wake of the first attack on the rigid patriarchal
family. It is doubtful that the sexual revolution could have remained
paralysed at half-way point for half a century without its help; for the
problems stirred up by the first wave of feminism are still not resolved
today. D. H. Lawrence and Bernard Shaw are no less relevant than they
were in their own time; Wilhelm Reich’s The Sexual Revolution could have
been written yesterday.

Freudianism was the perfect foil for feminism, because, though it struck
the same nerve, it had a safety catch that feminism didn’t – it never
questioned the given reality. While both at their cores are explosive,
Freudianism was gradually revised to suit the pragmatic needs of
clinical therapy: it became an applied science complete with
white-coated technicians, its contents subverted for a reactionary end –
the socialization of men and women to an artificial sex-role system. But
there was just enough left of its original force to serve as a lure for
those seeking their way out of oppression – causing Freudianism to go in
the public mind from extreme suspicion and dislike to its current
status: psychoanalytic expertise is the final say in everything from
marital breakups to criminal court judgements. Thus Freudianism gained
the ground that feminism lost: it flourished at the expense of feminism,
to the extent that it acted as a container of its shattering force.

Only recently have we begun to feel the generations of drugging; half a
century later women are waking up. There is a new emphasis on objective
social conditions in psychology as well as in the behavioural sciences;
these disciplines, only now, decades after the damage has been done, are
reacting to their long prostitution with demands for scientific
verification – but an end to ‘objectivity’ and a reintroduction of
‘value’ judgements’. The large numbers of women in these fields may soon
start using this fact to their advantage. And a therapy that has proven
worse than useless may eventually be replaced with the only thing that
can do any good: political organization.

4 Down with Childhood

FOR NECHEMIA

who will outgrow childhood before it is eliminated

 

Women and children are always mentioned in the same breath (‘Women and
children to the forts!’). The special tie women have with children is
recognized by everyone. I submit, however, that the nature of this bond
is no more than shared oppression. And that moreover this oppression is
intertwined and mutually reinforcing in such complex ways that we will
be unable to speak of the liberation of women without also discussing
the liberation of children, and – vice versa. The heart of woman’s
oppression is her child-bearing and child-rearing role. And in turn
children are defined in relation to this role and are psychologically
formed by it; what they become as adults and the sorts of relationships
they are able to form determine the society they will ultimately build.

\*   \*   \*

I have tried to show how the power hierarchies in the biological family,
and the sexual repressions necessary to maintain it – especially intense
in the patriarchal nuclear family – are destructive and costly to the
individual psyche. Before I go on to describe how and why it created a
cult of childhood, let us see how this patriarchal nuclear family
developed.

In every society to date there has been some form of the biological
family and thus there has always been oppression of women and children
to varying degrees. Engels, Reich, and others point to the primitive
matriarchies of the past as examples, attempting to show how
authoritarianism, exploitation, and sexual repression originated with
monogamy. However, turning to the past for ideal states is too facile.
Simone de Beauvoir is more honest when, in The Second Sex, she writes:

The peoples who have remained under the thumb of the goddess mother,
those who have retained the matrilineal régime, are also those who are
arrested at a primitive stage of civilization … The devaluation of women
\[under patriarchy\] represents a necessary stage in the history of
humanity, for it is not upon her positive value but upon man’s weakness,
that her prestige is founded. In woman are incarnated all the disturbing
mysteries of nature, and man escapes her hold when he frees himself from
nature … Thus the triumph of the patriarchate was neither a matter of
chance nor the result of violent revolution. From humanity’s beginnings
their biological advantage has enabled the males to affirm their status
as sole and sovereign subjects; they have never abdicated this position;
they once relinquished a part of their independent existence to Nature
and to Woman; but afterwards they won it back. (Italics mine)

She adds:

Perhaps however, if productive work had remained within her strength,
woman would have accomplished with man the conquest of nature … through
both male and female … but because she did not share his way of working
and thinking, because she remained in bondage to life’s mysterious
processes, the male did not recognize in her a being like himself.
(Italics mine)

Thus it was woman’s reproductive biology that accounted for her original
and continued oppression, and not some sudden patriarchal revolution,
the origins of which Freud himself was at a loss to explain. Matriarchy
is a stage on the way to patriarchy, to man’s fullest realization of
himself; he goes from worshipping Nature through women to conquering it.
Though it’s true that woman’s lot worsened considerably under
patriarchy, she never had it good; for despite all the nostalgia it is
not hard to prove that matriarchy was never an answer to women’s
fundamental oppression. Basically it was no more than a different means
of counting lineage and inheritance, one which, though it might have
held more advantages for women than the later patriarchy, did not allow
women into the society as equals. To be worshipped is not
freedom.[1](#part0017.html#chapter4-1) For worship still takes place in
someone else’s head, and that head belongs to Man. Thus throughout
history, in all stages and types of culture, women have been oppressed
due to their biological functions.

Turning to the past, while it offers no true model, is, however, of some
value in understanding the relativity of the oppression: though it has
been a fundamental human condition, it has appeared to differing degree
in different forms.

The patriarchal family was only the most recent in a string of ‘primary’
social organizations, all of which defined woman as a different species
due to her unique child-bearing capacity. The term family was first used
by the Romans to denote a social unit the head of which ruled over wife,
children, and slaves – under Roman law he was invested with rights of
life and death over them all; famulus means domestic slave, and familia
is the total number of slaves belonging to one man. But though the
Romans coined the term, they were not the first to develop the
institution. Read the Old Testament: for example, the description of
Jacob’s family train as after a long separation he travels to meet his
twin brother Esau. This early patriarchal household was only one of many
variations on the patriarchal family taking place in many different
cultures up to the present time.

However in order to illustrate the relative nature of children’s
oppression, rather than comparing these different forms of the
patriarchal family throughout history we need only examine the
development of its most recent version, the patriarchal nuclear family.
For even its short history, roughly from the fourteenth century on, is
revealing: the growth of our most cherished family values was contingent
on cultural conditions, its foundations in no sense absolute. Let’s
review the development of the nuclear family – and its construct
‘childhood’ – from the Middle Ages to the present, basing our analysis
on Philippe Ariès’s Centuries of Childhood: A Social History of Family
Life.

The modern nuclear family is only a recent development. Ariès shows that
the family as we know it did not exist in the Middle Ages, only
gradually evolving from the fourteenth century on. Until then one’s
‘family’ meant primarily one’s legal heredity line, the emphasis on
blood ancestry rather than the conjugal unit. With respect to such
legalities as the passing on of property, its primary function, there
was joint estate of the husband and wife, and joint ownership by the
heirs; only towards the end of the Middle Ages, with the increasing of
paternal authority in the bourgeois family, was joint estate by the
conjugal couple abolished, with joint ownership by all the sons giving
way to the laws of primogeniture. Ariès shows how iconography reflected
the current values of society in the Middle Ages: either solitary
compositions or large convivial groupings of people in public places
were the standard; there is a dearth of interior scenes, for life did
not take place inside a ‘home’. For at that time there was no retreat
into one’s private ‘primary group’. The family group was composed of
large numbers of people in a constant state of flux and, on the estates
of noblemen, whole crowds of servants, vassals, musicians, people of
every class as well as a good many animals, in the ancient patriarchal
household tradition. Though the individual might retire from this
constant social interaction to the spiritual or academic life, even in
this there was a community in which he could participate.

This medieval family – lineal honour of the upper classes, in the lower
nothing more than the conjugal pair planted in the midst of the
community – gradually developed into the matchbox family that we know.
Ariès describes the change: ‘It was as if a rigid polymorphous body had
broken up and had been replaced by a host of little societies, the
families, and by a few massive groups, the classes.’

Such a transformation caused profound cultural changes, as well as
affecting the very psychological structure of the individual. Even the
view of the life cycle of the individual has culturally evolved, e.g.,
‘adolescence’, which had never existed before, came in. Most important
of these new concepts of the stages of life was childhood.

I

THE MYTH OF CHILDHOOD

In the Middle Ages there was no such thing as childhood. The medieval
view of children was profoundly different from ours. It was not only
that it was not ‘child-centred’, it literally was not conscious of
children as distinct from adults. The child-men and child-women of
medieval iconography are miniature adults, reflecting a wholly different
social reality: children then were tiny adults, carriers of whatever
class and name they had been born to, destined to rise into a clearly
outlined social position. A child saw himself as the future adult going
through his stages of apprenticeship; he was his future powerful self
‘when I was little’. He moved into the various stages of his adult role
almost immediately.

Children were so little differentiated from adults that there was no
special vocabulary to describe them: they shared the vocabulary of
feudal subordination; only later, with the introduction of childhood as
a distinct state, did this confused vocabulary separate. The confusion
was based on reality: children differed socially from adults only in
their economic dependence. They were used as another transient servant
class, with the difference that because all adults began in this class,
it was not seen as degrading (an equivalent would be the indentured
servant of American history). All children were literally servants; it
was their apprenticeship to adulthood. (Thus for a long time after, in
France, waiting on table was not considered demeaning because it had
been practised as an art by all the youthful aristocracy.) This
experience held in common by children and servants and the resulting
intimacy that grew up between them has been bemoaned right down to the
twentieth century: as the classes grew more and more isolated from each
other, this lingering intimacy was considered the cause of considerable
moral corruption of children from the upper and middle classes.

The child was just another member of the large patriarchal household,
not even essential to family life. In every family the child was
wetnursed by a stranger, and thereafter sent to another home (from about
the age of seven until fourteen to eighteen) to serve an apprenticeship
to a master – as I have mentioned, usually composed of or including
domestic service. Thus he never developed a heavy dependence on his
parents: they were responsible only for his minimal physical welfare.
And they in turn did not ‘need’ their children – certainly children were
not doted upon. For in addition to the infant mortality rate, which
would discourage this, parents reared other people’s children for adult
life. And because households were so large, filled with many genuine
servants as well as a constant troupe of visitors, friends and clients,
a child’s dependence on, or even contact with, any specific parent was
limited; when a relationship did develop it might better be described as
avuncular.

Transmission from one generation to the next was ensured by the everyday
participation of children in adult life – children were never segregated
off into special quarters, schools, or activities. Since the aim was to
ready the child for adulthood as soon as possible, it was felt quite
reasonably that such a segregation would delay or stymie an adult
perspective. In every respect the child was integrated into the total
community as soon as possible: there were no special toys, games,
clothes, or classes designed just for children. Games were shared by all
age groups; children took part in the festivities of the adult
community. Schools (only for specialized skills) imparted learning to
anyone who was interested, of whatever age: the system of apprenticeship
was open to children as well as adults.

After the fourteenth century, with the development of the bourgeoisie
and empirical science, this situation slowly began to evolve. The
concept of childhood developed as an adjunct to the modern family. A
vocabulary to describe children and childhood was articulated (e.g., the
French le bébé) and another vocabulary was built especially for
addressing children: ‘childrenese’ became fashionable during the
seventeenth century. (Since then it has been expanded into an art and a
way of life. There are all kinds of modern refinements on baby talk:
some people never go without it, using it especially on their
girlfriends, whom they treat as grown-up children.) Children’s toys did
not appear until 1600 and even then were not used beyond the age of
three or four. The first toys were only childsize replicas of adult
objects: the hobby horse took the place of the real horse that the child
was too small to ride. But by the late seventeenth century special
artifacts for children were common. Also in the late seventeenth century
we find the introduction of special children’s games. (In fact these
signified only a division: certain games formerly shared by both
children and adults were abandoned by the adults to children and the
lower class, while other games were taken over from then on exclusively
for adult use, becoming the upper-class adult ‘parlour games’.)

Thus, by the seventeenth century childhood as a new and fashionable
concept was ‘in’. Ariès shows how the iconography too reflects the
change, with, for example, the gradual increase of glorified depictions
of the mother/child relationship, e.g., the Infant in the Arms of Mary,
or, later, in the fifteenth and the sixteenth centuries, of depictions
of interiors and family scenes, including even individualized portraits
of children and the paraphernalia of childhood. Rousseau among others
developed an ideology of ‘childhood’. Much was made of children’s purity
and ‘innocence’. People began to worry about their exposure to vice.
‘Respect’ for children, as for women, unknown before the sixteenth
century, when they were still part of the larger society, became
necessary now that they formed a clear-cut oppressed group. Their
isolation and segregation had set in. The new bourgeois family,
child-centred, entailed a constant supervision; all earlier independence
was abolished.

The significance of these changes is illustrated by the history of
children’s costume. Costume was a way of denoting social rank and
prosperity – and still is, especially for women. The consternation even
now, especially in Europe, at any clothing impropriety is due primarily
to the impropriety of ‘breaking rank’; and in the days when garments
were expensive and mass production unheard of, this function of clothing
was even more important. Because clothing customs so graphically
describe disparities of sex and class, the history of child fashion
gives us valuable clues to what was happening to children.

The first special children’s costumes appeared at the end of the
sixteenth century, an important date in the formation of the concept of
childhood. At first children’s clothing was modelled after archaic adult
clothing, in the fashion of the lower class, who also wore the
hand-me-downs of the aristocracy. These archaisms symbolized the growing
exclusion of children and the proletariat from contemporary public life.
Before the French Revolution, when special trousers of naval origin were
introduced, further distinguishing the lower class, we find the same
custom spreading to upper-class male children. This is important because
it illustrates quite clearly that children of the upper class formed a
lower class within it. That differentiation of costume functions to
increase segregation and make clear class distinctions is also borne out
by an otherwise unexplainable custom of the seventeenth and the
eighteenth centuries: two broad ribbons had to be worn by both male and
female children fastened to the robe under each shoulder and trailing
down the back. These ribbons apparently had no other function than to
serve as sartorial indications of childhood.

The male child’s costume especially reveals the connection of sex and
childhood with economic class. A male child went through roughly three
stages: the male infant went from swaddling clothes into female robes;
at about the age of five he switched to a robe with some elements of the
adult male costume, e.g., the collar; and finally, as an older boy, he
advanced to full military regalia. The costume worn by the older male
child in the period of Louis XVI was at once archaic (Renaissance
collar), lower-class (naval trousers), and masculinely military (jacket
and buttons), Clothing became another form of initiation into manhood,
with the child, in modern terms, begging to advance to ‘long pants’.

These stages of initiation into manhood reflected in the history of
child costume neatly tie in with the Oedipus Complex as I have presented
it in the previous chapter. Male children begin life in the lower class
of women. Dressed as women, they are in no way distinguished from female
children; both identify at this time with the mother, the female; both
play with dolls. Attempts are made at about the age of five to wean the
child from its mother, to encourage it by slow degrees, e.g., the male
collar, to imitate the father: this is the transitional period of the
Oedipus Complex. Finally the child is rewarded for breaking away from
the female and transferring his identifications to the male by a special
‘grown-up’ costume, its military regalia a promise of the full adult
male power to come.

What about girls’ costumes? Here is an astonishing fact: childhood did
not apply to women. The female child went from swaddling clothes right
into adult female dress. She did not go to school, which, as we shall
see, was the institution that structured childhood. At the age of nine
or ten she acted, literally, like a ‘little lady’; her activity did not
differ from that of adult women. As soon as she reached puberty, as
early as ten or twelve, she was married off to a much older male.

The class basis of childhood is exposed: both girls and working-class
boys did not have to be set apart by distinctive dress, for in their
adult roles they would be servile to upper-class men; no initiation into
freedom was necessary. Girls had no reason to go through costume
changes, when there was nothing for them to grow up to: adult women were
still in a lower class in relation to men. Children of the working
class, even up to the present day, were freed of clothing restrictions,
for their adult models, too, were ‘children’ relative to the ruling
class. While boys of the middle and upper classes temporarily shared the
status of women and the working class, they gradually were elevated out
of these subjected classes; women and lower-class boys stayed there. It
is no coincidence, either, that the effeminization of little boys’ dress
was abolished at the same time that the feminists agitated for an end to
oppressive women’s clothes. Both dress styles were integrally connected
to class subjection and the inferiority of women’s roles. Little Lord
Fauntleroy went the way of the petticoat. (Though my own father
remembers his first day in long pants, and even today, in some European
countries, these clothing initiation customs are still practised.)

We can also see the class basis of the emerging concept of childhood in
the system of child education that came in along with it. If childhood
was only an abstract concept, then the modern school was the institution
that built it into reality. (New concepts about the life cycle in our
society are organized around institutions, e.g., adolescence, a
construction of the nineteenth century, was built to facilitate
conscription for military service.) The modern school education was,
indeed, the articulation of the new concept of childhood. Schooling was
redefined: no longer confined to clerics and scholars, it was widely
extended to become the normal instrument of social initiation – in the
progress from childhood to munhood. (Those for whom true adulthood never
would apply, e.g., girls and working-class boys, did not go to school
for many centuries.)

For contrary to popular opinion, the development of the modern school
had little connection with the traditional scholarship of the Middle
Ages, nor with the development of the liberal arts and humanities in the
Renaissance. (In fact the humanists of the Renaissance were noted for
the inclusion in their ranks of many precocious children and learned
women; they stressed the development of the individual, of whatever age
or sex.) According to Ariès, literary historians exaggerate the
importance of the humanist tradition in the structure of our schools.
The real architects and innovators were the moralists and pedagogues of
the seventeenth century, the Jesuits, the Oratorians, and the
Jansenists. These men were at the origins of both the concept of
childhood and its institutionalization, the modern concept of schooling.
They were the first espousers of the weakness and ‘innocence’ of
childhood; they put childhood on a pedestal just as femininity had been
put on a pedestal; they preached the segregation of children from the
adult world. ‘Discipline’ was the keynote to modern schooling, much more
important finally than the imparting of learning or information. For to
them discipline was an instrument of moral and spiritual improvement,
adapted less for its efficiency in directing large groups to work in
common than for its intrinsic moral and ascetic value. That is,
repression itself was adopted as a spiritual value.

Thus, the function of the school became ‘child-rearing’, complete with
disciplinary ‘child psychology’. Ariès quotes the Regulations for
Boarders at Port-Royal, a forerunner of our teacher training manuals:

A close watch must be kept on the children, and they must never be left
alone anywhere, whether they are ill or in good health … this constant
supervision should be exercised gently and with a certain trustfulness
calculated to make them think one loves them, and that it is only to
enjoy their company that one is with them. This will make them love
their supervision rather than fear it. (Italics mine)

This passage, written in 1612, already exhibits the mincing tone
characteristic of modern child psychology, and the peculiar distance –
at that time rehearsed, but by now quite unconscious – between adults
and children.

The new schooling effectively segregated children off from the adult
world for longer and longer periods of time. But this segregation of
child from adult, and the severe initiation process demanded to make the
transition to adulthood, indicated a growing disrespect for, a
systematic underestimation of, the abilities of the child.

The precocity so common in the Middle Ages and for some time after has
dwindled almost to zero in our own time.[2](#part0017.html#chapter4-2)
Today, for example, Mozart’s feats as a child composer are hardly
credible; in his own time he was not so unusual. Many children played
and wrote music seriously then and also engaged in a good many other
‘adult’ activities. Our piano lessons of today are in no way comparable.
They are, in fact, only indications of child oppression – in the same
way that the traditional ‘women’s accomplishments’ such as embroidery
are superficial activity – telling us only about the subjugation of the
child to adult whims. And it is significant that these ‘talents’ are
more often cultivated in girls than in boys; when boys study piano it is
most often because they are exceptionally gifted or because their
parents are musical.

Ariès quotes Heroard, Journal sur l’enfance et la jeunesse de Louis
XIII, the detailed account of the Dauphin’s childhood years written by
his doctor, that the Dauphin played the violin and sang all the time at
the age of seventeen months. But the Dauphin was no genius, later
proving himself to be certainly no more intelligent than any average
member of the aristocracy. And playing the violin wasn’t all he did: the
record of the child life of the Dauphin, born in 1601 – of only average
intelligence – tells us that we underestimate the capabilities of
children. We find that at the same age that he played the violin, he
also played mall, the equivalent of golf for adults of that period, as
well as tennis; he talked; he played games of military strategy. At
three and four respectively, he learned to read and write. At four and
five, though still playing with dolls (!), he practised archery, played
cards and chess (at six) with adults, and played many other adult games.
At all times, just as soon as he was able to walk, he mixed as an equal
with adults in all their activities (such as they were), professionally
dancing, acting, and taking part in all amusements. At the age of seven
the Dauphin began to wear adult male clothes, his dolls were taken away,
and his education under male tutors began; he began hunting, riding,
shooting, and gambling. But Ariès says:

We should beware of exaggerating \[the importance of this age of
seven\]. For all that he had stopped playing, or should have stopped
playing, with his dolls, the Dauphin went on leading the same life as
before … Rather more dolls and German toys before seven, and more
hunting, riding, fencing, and possibly playgoing after seven; the change
was almost imperceptible in that long succession of pastimes which the
child shared with the adult.

What seems most clear to me from this description is this: that before
the advent of the nuclear family and modern schooling, childhood was as
little as possible distinct from adult life. The child learned directly
from the adults around him, emerging as soon as he was able into adult
society. At about the age of seven there was some sex-role
differentiation – it had to happen sometime, given the patriarchy in
operation, but this was not yet complicated by the lower-class position
of children. The distinction as yet was only between men and women, not
yet between children and adults. In another century, this had begun to
change, as the oppression of women and children increasingly
intertwined.

In summary, with the onset of the child-centred nuclear family, an
institution became necessary to structure a ‘childhood’ that would keep
children under the jurisdiction of parents as long as possible. Schools
multiplied, replacing scholarship and a practical apprenticeship with a
theoretical education, the function of which was to ‘discipline’
children rather than to impart learning for its own sake. Thus it is no
surprise that modern schooling retards development rather than
escalating it. By sequestering children away from the adult world –
adults are, after all, simply larger children with worldly experience –
and by artificially subjecting them to an adult/child ratio of one to
twenty-plus, how could the final effect be other than a levelling of the
group to a median (mediocre) intelligence? As if this weren’t enough,
after the eighteenth century a rigid separation and distinction of ages
took place (‘grades’). Children were no longer able to learn even from
older and wiser children. They were restricted in most of their waking
hours to a chronological finely-drawn[3](#part0017.html#chapter4-3) peer
group, and then spoon-fed a ‘curriculum’. Such a rigid gradation
increased the levels necessary for the initiation into adulthood and
made it hard for a child to direct his own pace. His learning motivation
became outer-directed and approval-conscious, a sure killer of
originality. Children, once seen simply as younger people – the way we
now see a half-grown puppy in terms of its future maturity – were now a
clear-cut class with its own internal rankings, encouraging competition:
the ‘biggest guy on the block’, the ‘brainiest guy in school’, etc.
Children were forced to think in hierarchical terms, all measured by the
supreme ‘When I grow up…’ In this the growth of the school reflected the
outside world which was becoming increasingly segregated according to
age and class.

\*   \*   \*

In conclusion: the development of the modern family meant the breakdown
of a large, integrated society into small, self-centred units. The child
within these conjugal units now became important; for he was the product
of that unit, the reason for its maintenance. It became desirable to
keep one’s children at home for as long as possible to bind them
psychologically, financially, and emotionally to the family unit until
such time as they were ready to create a new family unit. For this
purpose the Age of Childhood was created. (Later, extensions were added,
such as adolescence, or in twentieth-century American terms,
‘Teen-agerdom’, ‘Collegiate Youth’, ‘Young Adulthood’.) The concept of
childhood dictated that children were a species different not just in
age, but in kind, from adults. An ideology was developed to prove this,
fancy tractates written about the innocence of children and their
closeness to God (‘little angels’), with a resulting belief that
children were asexual, child sex play an aberration – all in strong
contrast to the period preceding it, when children were exposed to the
facts of life from the beginning.[4](#part0017.html#chapter4-4) For any
admission of child sexuality would have accelerated the transition into
adulthood, and this now had to be retarded at all cost: the development
of special costumes soon exaggerated the physical differences
distinguishing children from adults or even from older children;
children no longer played the same games as adults, nor did they share
in their festivities (children today do not normally attend fancy dinner
parties) but were given special games and artifacts of their own (toys);
storytelling, once a community art, was relegated to children, leading
to in our own time a special child literature; children were spoken to
in a special language by adults and serious conversation was never
indulged in their presence (‘Not in front of the children’); the
‘manners’ of subjection were instituted in the home (‘Children should be
seen and not heard’). But none of this would have worked to effectively
make of children an oppressed class if a special institution hadn’t been
created to do the job thoroughly: the modern school.

The ideology of school was the ideology of childhood. It operated on the
assumption that children needed ‘discipline’, that they were special
creatures who had to be handled in a special way (child psych., child
ed., etc.) and that to facilitate this they should be corralled in a
special place with their own kind, and with an age group as restricted
to their own as possible. The school was the institution that structured
childhood by effectively segregating children from the rest of society,
thus retarding their growth into adulthood and their development of
specialized skills for which the society had use. As a result they
remained economically dependent for longer and longer periods of time;
thus family ties remained unbroken.

I have pointed out that there is a strong relationship between the
hierarchies of the family and economic class. Engels has observed that
within the family the husband is the bourgeois and the wife and children
are the proletariat. Similarities between children and all working-class
or other oppressed groups have been noted, studies done to show that
they share the same psychology. We have seen how the development of the
proletarian costume paralleled that of children’s costume, how games
abandoned by upper-class adults were played by both children and
‘yokels’; both were said to like to ‘work with their hands’ as opposed
to the higher cerebrations of the adult male, abstractions beyond them;
both were considered happy, carefree, and good-natured, ‘more in touch
with reality’; both were reminded that they were lucky to be spared the
worries of responsible adulthood – and both wanted it anyway. Relations
with the ruling class were tinged in both cases by fear, suspicion, and
dishonesty, disguised under a thin coating of charm (the adorable lisp,
the eyeroll and the shuffle).

The myth of childhood has an even greater parallel in the myth of
femininity. Both women and children were considered asexual and thus
‘purer’ than man. Their inferior status was ill-concealed under an
elaborate ‘respect’. One didn’t discuss serious matters nor did one
curse in front of women and children; one didn’t openly degrade them,
one did it behind their backs. (As for the double standard about
cursing: a man is allowed to blaspheme the world because it belongs to
him to damn – but the same curse out of the mouth of a woman or a minor,
i.e. an incomplete ‘man’ to whom the world does not yet belong, is
considered presumptuous, and thus an impropriety or worse.) Both were
set apart by fancy and nonfunctional clothing and were given special
tasks (housework and homework respectively); both were considered
mentally deficient (‘What can you expect from a woman?’ ‘He’s too little
to understand’). The pedestal of adoration on which both were set made
it hard for them to breathe. Every interaction with the adult world
became for children a tap dance. They learned how to use their childhood
to get what they wanted indirectly (‘He’s throwing another tantrum!’),
just as women learned how to use their femininity (‘There she goes,
crying again!’). All excursions into the adult world became terrifying
survival expeditions. The difference between the natural behaviour of
children in their peer group as opposed to their stilted and/or coy
behaviour with adults bears this out – just as women act differently
among themselves than when they are around men. In each case a physical
difference had been enlarged culturally with the help of special dress,
education, manners, and activity until this cultural reinforcement
itself began to appear ‘natural’, even instinctive, an exaggeration
process that enables easy stereotyping: the individual eventually
appears to be a different kind of human animal with its own peculiar set
of laws and behaviour (‘I’ll never understand women!’… ‘You don’t know a
thing about child psychology!’).

Contemporary slang reflects this animal state: children are ‘mice’,
‘rabbits’, ‘kittens’, women are called ‘chicks’, ‘birds’ (in England),
‘hens’, ‘dumb clucks’, ‘silly geese’, ‘old mares’, ‘bitches’. Similar
terminology is used about males as a defamation of character, or more
broadly only about oppressed males: stud, wolf, cat, stag, jack – and
then it is used much more rarely, and often with a specifically sexual
connotation.

Because the class oppression of women and children is couched in the
phraseology of ‘cute’ it is much harder to fight than open oppression.
What child can answer back when some inane aunt falls all over him or
some stranger decides to pat his behind and gurgle baby talk? What woman
can afford to frown when a passing stranger violates her privacy at
will? If she responds to his, ‘Baby you’re looking good today!’ with ‘No
better than when I didn’t know you’, he will grumble, ‘What’s eating
that bitch?’ Or worse. Very often the real nature of these seemingly
friendly remarks emerges when the child or the woman does not smile as
she should: ‘Dirty old scum bag. I wouldn’t screw you even if you had a
smile on your puss!’… ‘Nasty little brat. If I were your father I would
spank you so hard you wouldn’t know what hit you!’… Their violence is
amazing. Yet these men feel that the woman or the child is to blame for
not being ‘friendly’. Because it makes them uncomfortable to know that
the woman or the child or the black or the workman is grumbling, the
oppressed groups must also appear to like their oppression – smiling and
simpering though they may feel like hell inside. The smile is the
child/woman equivalent of the shuffle; it indicates acquiescence of the
victim to her own oppression.

In my own case, I had to train myself out of that phony smile, which is
like a nervous tic on every teenage girl. And this meant that I smiled
rarely, for in truth, when it came down to real smiling, I had less to
smile about. My ‘dream’ action for the women’s liberation movement: a
smile boycott, at which declaration all women would instantly abandon
their ‘pleasing’ smiles, henceforth smiling only when something pleased
them. Likewise children’s liberation would demand an end to all fondling
not welcomed by the child itself. (This of course would predicate a
society in which fondling in general was no longer frowned upon; often
the only demonstration of affection a child now receives is of this
phony kind, which he may still consider better than nothing.) Many men
can’t understand that their easy intimacies come as no privilege. Do
they ever consider that the real person inside that baby or female
animal may not choose to be fondled then, or by them, or even noticed?
Imagine this man’s own consternation were some stranger to approach him
on the street in a similar manner – patting, gurgling, muttering baby
talk – without respect for his profession or his ‘manhood’.

In sum, if members of the working class and minority groups ‘act like
children’, it is because children of every class are lower-class, just
as women have always been. The rise of the modern nuclear family, with
its adjunct ‘childhood’, tightened the noose around the already
economically dependent group by extending and reinforcing what had been
only a brief dependence, by the usual means: the development of a
special ideology, of a special indigenous life style, language, dress,
mannerisms, etc. And with the increase and exaggeration of children’s
dependence, woman’s bondage to motherhood was also extended to its
limits. Women and children were now in the same lousy boat. Their
oppressions began to reinforce one another. To the mystique of the
glories of childbirth, the grandeur of ‘natural’ female creativity, was
now added a new mystique about the glories of childhood itself and the
‘creativity’ of child-rearing. (‘Why, my dear, what could be more
creative than raising a child?’) By now people have forgotten what
history has proven: that ‘raising’ a child is tantamount to retarding
his development. The best way to raise a child is to LAY OFF.

II

OUR TIME: THE MYTH IS MAGNIFIED

We have seen how the increasing privatization of family life brought
ever more oppression to its dependents, women and children. The
interrelated myths of femininity and childhood were the instruments of
this oppression. In the Victorian Era they reached such epic proportions
that finally women rebelled – their rebellion peripherally affecting
childhood. But the rebellion was destroyed before it could eliminate
these myths. They went underground to reappear in a more insidious
version, complicated by mass consumerism. For in fact nothing had
changed. In Chapter 2 I described how the emancipation of women was
subtly sabotaged; the same thing occurred in the corollary oppression
‘childhood’.

The pseudo-emancipation of children exactly parallels the
pseudo-emancipation of women: though we have abolished all the
superficial signs of oppression – the distinct and cumbrous clothing,
the schoolmaster’s rod – there is no question that the myth of childhood
is flourishing in epic proportions, twentieth-century style: whole
industries are built on the manufacture of special toys, games, baby
food, breakfast food, children’s books and comic books, candy with child
appeal, etc.; market analysts study child psychology in order to develop
products that will appeal to children of various ages; there is a
publishing, movie, and TV industry built just for them, with its own
special literature, programmes and commercials, and even censorship
boards to decide just which cultural products are fit for their
consumption; there is an endless proliferation of books and magazines
instructing the layman in the fine art of child care (Dr Spock, Parents’
Magazine); there are specialists in child psychology, child education
methods, pediatrics, and all the special branches of learning that have
developed recently to study this peculiar animal. Compulsory education
flourishes and is now widespread enough to form an inescapable net of
socialization (brainwashing) from which even the very rich can no longer
entirely escape. Gone are the days of Huckleberry Finn: today the
malingerer or dropout has a full-time job just in warding off the swarm
of specialists studying him, the proliferating government programmes,
the social workers on his tail.

Let’s look more closely at the modern form this ideology of childhood
takes: visually it is as beefy, blonde, and smiling as a Kodak
advertisement. As is the case with the exploitation of women as a
ready-made, consumer class, there are many industries eager to profit
from children’s physical vulnerability (e.g., St Joseph’s Aspirin for
children); but even more than their health, the key word to the
understanding of modern childhood is happiness. You are only a child
once, and this is it. Children must be living embodiments of happiness
(sulky or upset or disturbed children are immediately disliked; they
make of the myth a lie); it is every parent’s duty to give his child a
childhood to remember (swing sets, inflated swimming pools, toys and
games, camping trips, birthday parties, etc.). This is the Golden Age
that the child will remember when he grows up to become a robot like his
father. So every father tries to give his son whatever it was he missed
most himself in what should have been a most glorious stage of his own
life. The cult of childhood as the Golden Age is so strong that all
other ages of life derive their value from how closely they resemble it,
in a national cult of youth; ‘grownups’ make asses of themselves with
their jealous apologetics (‘Of course I’m twice your age, dear, but…’).
There is the general belief that progress has been made because at least
in our time children have been freed from the ugly toils of child labour
and many other traditional exploitations of past generations. In fact
there is even the envious moan that children are getting too much
attention. They are spoiled. (‘When I was your age…’ parallels ‘Women
have it easy…’)

A major bulwark for this myth of happiness is the continued rigid
segregation of children from the rest of society; the exageration of
their distinctive features has made of them, as it was designed to,
almost another race. Our parks provide the perfect metaphor for our
larger age-segregated society: a special playground for the Tender
Untouchables, mothers and young children (one seldom finds anyone else
here, as if by decree), an athletic field or swimming pool for the
youth, a shady knoll for young couples and students, and a bench section
for the elderly. This age segregation continues throughout the life of
every modern individual; people have very little contact with children
once they have outgrown their own childhood. And even within their own
childhood, as we have seen, there are rigid age segregations, so that an
older child will be embarrassed to be seen with a younger one.
(‘Tagalong! Why don’t you go play with someone your own age!’)
Throughout school life, and that is a rather long time in our century, a
child remains with others only a year or two in age from himself. The
schools themselves reflect these increasingly rigid gradations: junior
junior high, senior junior high, etc., marked by a complex system of
promotions and ‘graduations’; lately even graduations from nursery
school and/or kindergarten are common.

So by the time a child grows old enough to reproduce himself he has no
contact whatever with those outside his own narrow adult age group, and
certainly not with children. Because of the cult surrounding it he can
barely remember even his own childhood, often blocking it entirely. Even
as a child he may have attempted to mould himself to the myth, believing
that all other children were happier than he; later, as a teenager, he
may have indulged in a desperate joyousness, flinging himself into ‘fun’
– when really adolescence is a horror to live through – in the spirit of
‘you’re only young once’. (But true youth is unaware of age – ‘youth is
wasted on the young’ – and is marked by real spontaneity, the absence of
precisely this self-consciousness. The storing up of happiness in this
manner to think of when you no longer have it is an idea only old age
could have produced.) Such an absence of contact with the reality of
childhood makes every young adult ripe for the same sentimentalization
of children that he himself probably despised as a child. And so it
goes, in a vicious circle: young adults dream of having their own
children in a desperate attempt to fill up the void produced by the
artificial cutoff from the young, but it is not until they are mired in
pregnancies and Pampers, babysitters and school problems, favouritism
and quarrelling that they again, for a short period, are forced to see
that children are just human like the rest of us.

So let’s talk about what childhood is really like, and not of what it is
like in adult heads. It is clear that the myth of childhood happiness
flourishes so wildly not because it satisfies the needs of children but
because it satisfies the needs of adults. In a culture of alienated
people, the belief that everyone has at least one good period in life
free of care and drudgery dies hard. And obviously you can’t expect it
in your old age. So it must be you’ve already had it. This accounts for
the fog of sentimentality surrounding any discussion of childhood or
children. Everyone is living out some private dream in their behalf.

\*   \*   \*

Thus segregation is still operating full blast to reinforce the
oppression of children as a class. What constitutes this oppression in
the twentieth century?

Physical and Economic dependence. The natural physical inferiority of
children relative to adults – their greater weakness, their smaller size
– is reinforced, rather than compensated for, by our present culture:
children are still ‘minors’ under the law, without civil rights, the
property of an arbitrary set of parents. (Even when they have ‘good’
parents, there are just as many ‘bad’ people in the world as ‘good’ –
and the ‘bad’ people are considerably more likely to bear children.) The
number of child beatings and deaths every year testifies to the fact
that merely unhappy children are lucky. A lot worse could happen. It is
only recently that doctors saw fit to report these casualties, so much
were children at the mercy of their parents. Those children without
parents, however, are even worse off (just as single women, women
without the patronage of a husband, are still worse off than married
women). There is no place for them but the orphanage, a dumping ground
for the unwanted.

But the oppression of children is most of all rooted in economic
dependence. Anyone who has ever observed a child wheedling a nickel from
its mother knows that economic dependence is the basis of the child’s
shame. (Relatives who bring money are often the best liked. But make
sure you give it directly to the kid!) Though he may not be starving to
death (neither would he be if children had their own employment; black
children who shine shoes, beg, and cultivate various rackets, and
working-class white boys who sell papers, are envied in their
neighbourhood) he is dependent for his survival on patronage, and that’s
a bad state to be in. Such extreme dependence is hardly worth the bread.

It is in this area that we find one of the pivots of the modern myth: we
are told that childhood represents great progress – immediately calling
to mind Dickensian images of poor, gaunt children struggling in a coal
pit. We have shown, however, in the brief history of childhood presented
earlier in this chapter, that middle-class and upper-class children were
not labouring at the dawn of the Industrial Era, but were safely
ensconced in some dull schoolhouse studying Homer and Latin grammar. The
children of the lower class, it is true, were not considered any more
privileged than their fathers, sharing the inhuman tortures to which all
members of their class had to submit; so that at the same time as there
were idle Emma Bovarys and Little Lord Fauntleroys, there were also
women destroying their lives and lungs in early textile mills and
children roaming, begging. This difference between the lives of children
of the different economic classes persisted right up until the days of
the women’s vote and into our own time. Children who were the
reproductive chattel of the middle class were enduring soul-squeezing
worse than our own; so were women. But they, to offset this, had
economic patronage. Children of the lower class were exploited, not
particularly as children, but generally, on a class basis: the myth of
childhood was too fancy to waste on them. Here again we see illustrated
just how arbitrary a myth childhood was, ordered expressly for the needs
of the middle-class family structure.

Yes, you say, but surely it would have been better for the children of
the working class could they too have lived sheltered by this myth. At
least they would have been spared their lives. So that they could sweat
out their spiritual lives in some schoolroom or office? The question is
rhetorical, like wondering whether the suffering of the blacks in
America is authentic because they would be considered rich in some other
country. Suffering is suffering. No, we have to think in broader terms
here. Like, why were their parents being exploited in the first place:
what is anybody doing down in that coal mine? What we ought to be
protesting, rather than that children are being exploited just like
adults, is that adults can be so exploited. We need to start talking not
about sparing children for a few years from the horrors of adult life,
but about eliminating those horrors. In a society free of exploitation,
children could be like adults (with no exploitation implied) and adults
could be like children (with no exploitation implied). The privileged
slavery (patronage) that women and children undergo is not freedom. For
self-regulation is the basis of freedom, and dependence the origin of
inequality.

Sexual repression. Freud depicts the early contentment of the child: the
satisfaction of the infant at the breast of the mother, which it then
tries to regain for the rest of its life; how, due to adult protection,
the child is freer from the ‘reality principle’ and is allowed to play
(activity done for the pleasure of it, and not to achieve any other
end); how, sexually, the child is polymorphous and only later is so
directed and repressed as to make him fit only for adult genital sex
pleasure.

Freud also showed the origins of the adult neurosis to be built into the
very processes of childhood. Though the prototypical child may have the
capacity for pure pleasure, that does not mean that he can fully indulge
it. It would be more correct to say that though by nature inclined to
pleasure, to the degree that he becomes socialized (repressed) he loses
this inclination. And that begins right away.

The ‘reality principle’ is not reserved for adults. It is introduced
into the child’s life almost immediately on his own small scale. For as
long as such a reality principle exists, the notion of sparing the child
its unpleasantness is a sham. At best he can go through a retarded
repressive process; but more often the repression takes place as soon as
he can handle it, at all levels. It is not as though there is ever a
blessed period when ‘reality’ lays off. For in truth the repression
begins as soon as he is born – the well-known formula-by-clock feedings
only an extreme example. Before the age of eighteen months, says Robert
Stoller, the basic sex differentiation has set in, and as we have seen,
this process in itself demands inhibition of the sex drive towards the
mother. So from the beginning his polymorphous sexuality is denied free
play. (Even now, with a campaign to recognize masturbation as normal,
many infants are kept from playing with themselves while still in their
cribs.) The child is weaned and toilet trained, the sooner the better –
both traumatic in child terms. Repressions increase. The mother love
that ideally is meant to be such perfect fulfilment (‘unconditional’) is
used in the manner of father love: to better direct the child into
socially approved conduct. And finally an active identification with the
father is demanded. (In fatherless homes the identification may occur
somewhat later, when the child begins school.) From here until puberty
the child must lead a sexless – or secretive – life, not even admitting
any sexual needs. Such forced asexuality produces a frustration that is
at least partially responsible for the extreme rambunctiousness and
aggressiveness – or alternately the anaemic docility – that often make
children so trying to be around.

Family repression. We don’t need to elaborate on the subtle
psychological pressures of family life. Think of your own family. And if
that isn’t enough, if you are actually that one-in-a-million who is
truly convinced that you had a ‘happy family’, read some of the work of
R. D. Laing, particularly the Polities of the Family, on the Game of
Happy Families. Laing exposes the internal dynamics of the family,
explaining its invisibility to the ordinary family member:

One thing is often clear to an outsider: there are concerted family
resistances to discovering what is going on, and there are complicated
stratagems to keep everyone in the dark, and in the dark that they are
in the dark. The truth has to be expended to sustain a family image …
Since this fantasy exists only in so far as it is ‘in’ everyone who
shares ‘in’ it, anyone who gives it up shatters the ‘family’ in everyone
else.

And here are a few children speaking for themselves. Again we quote
Reik:

I was told of a boy, who, until he was almost four years old, thought
that his name was ‘Shutup’.

A boy witnessed a furious quarrel between his parents and heard his
mother threaten his father with divorce. When he returned home from
school the next day, he asked his mother, ‘Are you divorced yet?’ He
remembered later being very disappointed because she had not gotten
divorced.

A boy of nine years was asked by his visiting father at camp if he felt
homesick, and the boy replied, ‘No.’ The father then asked if the other
boys felt homesick. ‘Only a few,’ said the child, ‘those who have dogs
at home.’

What is amusing about these anecdotes, if indeed they are amusing, is
the candour of children unable to understand or accept the masochistic
hell of it all.

Educational repression. It is at school that the repression is cemented.
Any illusions of freedom remaining are quickly wiped out now. All sexual
activity or physical demonstrativeness is barred. Here is the first
heavily supervised play. Children’s natural enjoyment of play is now
co-opted to better socialize (repress) them. (‘Larry did the best
fingerpainting. What a good boy! Your mother will be proud of you!’) In
some liberal schools all the way up, it is true, good teachers try to
find subjects and activities that will truly interest children. (It’s
easier to keep the class in order that way.) But as we have seen, the
repressive structure of the segregated classroom itself guarantees that
any natural interest in learning will finally serve the essentially
disciplinary interests of the school. Young teachers entering the system
idealistic about their jobs suddenly are up against it: many give up in
despair. If they had forgotten what a jail school was for them, it all
comes back now. And they are soon forced to see that though there are
liberal jails and not-so-liberal jails, by definition they are jails.
The child is forced to go to them: the test is that he would never go of
his own accord. (‘School’s out, School’s out, Teachers let the fools
out, No more pencils, No more books, No more teacher’s dirty looks.’)
And though enlightened educators have devised whole systems of
inherently interesting disciplined activities to lure and bribe the
child into an acceptance of school, these can never fully succeed, for a
school that existed solely to serve the curiosity of children on their
own terms and by their own direction would be a contradiction in terms –
as we have seen, the modern school in its structural definition exists
to implement repression.

The child spends most of his waking hours in this coercive structure or
doing homework for it. The little time that is left is often taken up
with family chores and duties. He is forced to sit through endless
family arguments, or, in some ‘liberal’ families, ‘family councils’.
There are relatives at whom he must smile, and often church services
that he must attend. In the little time left, at least in our modern
middle class, he is ‘supervised’, blocking the development of initiative
and creativity: his choice of play materials is determined for him (toys
and games), his play area is defined (gyms, parks, playgrounds,
camp-sites); often he is limited in his choice of playmates to children
of the same economic class as himself, and in the suburbs, to his
schoolmates, or children of his parents’ friends; he is organized into
more groups than he knows what to do with (Boy Scouts, Cub Scouts, Girl
Scouts, Brownies, camps, after-school clubs and sports); his culture is
chosen for him – on TV he is often allowed to watch only pap children’s
programmes (father knows best) and is barred from all adult (good)
movies; his books and literature are often taken from corny children’s
lists. (Dick and Jane. The Bobbsey Twins. The Partridge Family. The
Annals of Babe Ruth. Robinson Crusoe. Lassie ad nauseam.)

The only children who have the slightest chance of escape from this
supervised nightmare – but less and less so – are children of the
ghettos and the working class where the medieval conception of open
community – living on the street – still lingers. That is, historically,
as we have seen, many of these processes of childhood came late to the
lower class, and have never really stuck. Lower-class children tend to
come from large immediate families composed of people of many different
ages. But even when they don’t, often there are half-brothers and
sisters, cousins, nieces, nephews, or aunts, in a constantly changing
milieu of relatives. Individual children are barely noticed, let alone
supervised: children are often allowed to roam far from home or play out
on the streets until all hours. And on the street, if by chance their
family size is limited, there are hundreds of kids, many of whom have
formed their own social groupings (gangs).[5](#part0017.html#chapter4-5)
They do not often receive toys, which means they create their own. (I
have seen ghetto kids devise ingenious slides out of cardboard and put
them up against old tenements with missing steps; I have seen others
make go-carts and pulleys out of old tyre wheels and string and boxes.
No middle-class child does that. He doesn’t need to. But as a result he
soon loses that ingenuity.) They explore far afield of their own few
blocks, and much more often than their middle-class contemporaries make
the acquaintance of adults on an equal level. In class they are wild and
unruly, as indeed they ought to be – for the classroom is a situation
that would make any even partially free person suspicious. There is a
lingering disrespect for school in the lower class, for, after all, it
is a middle-class phenomenon in origin.

Sexually, too, ghetto kids are freer. One fellow told me that he can’t
remember an age when he didn’t have sexual intercourse with other kids
as a natural thing; everyone was doing it. Those who teach in ghetto
schools have remarked on the impossibility of restraining child
sexuality: it’s a groovy thing, the kids love it, and it far surpasses a
lesson about the Great American Democracy or the contribution of the
Hebrews who developed Monotheism or coffee and rubber as the chief
exports of Brazil. So they do it on the stairs. And stay away from
school the next day. If, in modern America, free childhood exists in any
degree, it exists in the lower class, where the myth is least developed.

Why then do they ‘turn out’ worse than middle-class kids? Perhaps this
is obvious. But I shall answer from my experience living and teaching in
the ghettos: ghetto kids are not lower in intelligence until they reach
adulthood, and even this is debatable; lower-class children are some of
the brightest, brassiest, and most original children around. They are
that way because they are left alone. (If they do not do well on tests,
perhaps we ought to reexamine the tests and not the children.) Later, in
confronting a ‘reality principle’ very different from the middle-class
one, they are drained and smashed; they will never ‘out-grow’ their
economic subjection. Thus it is day-by-day oppression that produces
these listless and unimaginative adults, the ubiquitous restrictions on
their personal freedom to expand – not their wild childhood.

But children of the ghettos are only relatively free. They are still
dependent, and they are oppressed as an economic class. There is good
reason that all children want to grow up. Then at least they can leave
home, and (finally) have a chance to do what they want to do. (There is
some irony in the fact that children imagine that parents can do what
they want, and parents imagine that children do. ‘When I grow up…’
parallels ‘Oh to be a child again…’) They dream of love and sex, for
they live in the driest period of their lives. Often when confronted
with their parents’ misery, they make firm vows that when they grow up,
that won’t happen to them; they build glorious dreams of perfect
marriages, or of no marriage at all (smarter children, who realize the
fault lies in the institution, not in their parents), of money to spend
as they please, of plenty of love and acclaim; they want to appear older
than they are and are insulted if told that they appear younger than
they are. They try fiercely to disguise the ignorance of affairs that is
the peculiar physical affliction of all children. Here is an example
from Reik’s Sex in Man and Woman of the little cruelties to which they
are constantly subjected:

I had some fun with a boy four years old, whom I told that a certain
tree in his parents’ garden bore pieces of chewing gum. I had bought
some chewing gum and had hung the sticks by strings on the lower bough
of the tree. The boy climbed up and picked them. He did not doubt that
they grew on the tree, nor did he consider that they were wrapped in
paper. He willingly accepted my explanation that the sticks of gum,
blossoming at different times, had various flavors. In the following
year when I reminded him of the chewing-gum tree, he was very ashamed of
his previous credulity and said, ‘Don’t mention that.’

Some children, in an attempt to fight this constant ridicule of their
gullibility – when they see that their painful ignorance is considered
‘cute’ – try to cash in on it, in much the same way that women do.
Hoping to elicit that hug and kiss, they purposely take things out of
context, but it seldom works the second time, perplexing them: what they
don’t understand is that the ignorance itself is considered ‘funny’, not
its specific manifestations. For most children don’t understand the
arbitrary adult order of things, inadequately explained even when there
is a sound explanation. But, in almost every case given the amount of
information the child begins with, his conclusions are perfectly
logical. Similarly if an adult were to arrive on a strange planet to
find the inhabitants building fires on their roofs, he might assume an
explanation; but his conclusions, based on his dissimilar past, might
cause the others some amusement. Every person in his first trip to a
foreign country, where he knows neither the people nor the language,
experiences childhood.

\*   \*   \*

Children, then, are not freer than adults. They are burdened by a wish
fantasy in direct proportion to the restraints of their narrow lives;
with an unpleasant sense of their own physical inadequacy and
ridiculousness; with constant shame about their dependence, economic and
otherwise (‘Mother, may I?’); and humiliation concerning their natural
ignorance of practical affairs. Children are repressed at every waking
minute. Childhood is hell.

The result is the insecure, and therefore aggressive/defensive, often
obnoxious little person we call a child. Economic, sexual, and general
psychological oppressions reveal themselves in coyness, dishonesty,
spite, these unpleasant characteristics in turn reinforcing the
isolation of children from the rest of society. Thus their rearing,
particularly in its most difficult personality phases, is gladly
relinquished to women – who tend, for the same reason, to exhibit these
personality characteristics themselves. Except for the ego rewards
involved in having children of one’s own, few men show any interest in
children. And fewer still grant them their due political importance.

So it is up to feminist (ex-child and still oppressed child-women)
revolutionaries to do so. We must include the oppression of children in
any programme for feminist revolution or we will be subject to the same
failing of which we have so often accused men: of not having gone deep
enough in our analysis, of having missed an important substratum of
oppression merely because it didn’t directly concern us. I say this
knowing full well that many women are sick and tired of being lumped
together with children: that they are no more our charge and
responsibility than anyone else’s will be an assumption crucial to our
revolutionary demands. It is only that we have developed, in our long
period of related sufferings, a certain compassion and understanding for
them that there is no reason to lose now; we know where they’re at, what
they’re experiencing, because we, too, are still undergoing the same
kind of oppressions. The mother who wants to kill her child for what she
has had to sacrifice for it (a common desire) learns to love that same
child only when she understands that it is as helpless, as oppressed as
she is, and by the same oppressor: then her hatred is directed outwards,
and ‘mother-love’ is born. But we will go further: our final step must
be the elimination of the very conditions of femininity and childhood
themselves that are now conducive to this alliance of the oppressed,
clearing the way for a fully human condition.

5 Racism: The Sexism of the Family of Man

The slave may be freed and woman be where she is, but women cannot be
freed and the slave remain where he is.

Angelina Grimké, in a letter to

Theodore Weld

 

What must be done, I believe, is that all these problems, particularly
the sickness between the white woman and the black man, must be brought
out into the open, dealt with, and resolved … I think all of us, the
entire nation, will be better off if we bring it all out front.

Eldridge Cleaver, On Becoming

 

The first American book to deal specifically with the connection of sex
and racism was Calvin Hernton’s Sex and Racism in America. The immediate
popularity of the book in both black and white communities confirmed
what everyone had known all along: that sex and racism are intricately
interwoven. However, Hernton, not sufficiently grasping the depth of the
relationship, merely described the obvious: that white men have a thing
for black women, that black men have a thing for white women, that black
men can’t respect black women and white men can’t get turned on by white
women, that white women have a secret sympathy and curiosity about black
men, that black women hate and are jealous of white women, and so on.
Even so, the book, as have the many such books and articles since, made
instant waves. Why is this?

The early civil rights movement had hushed up the truth too long: suited
and tied, it had tiptoed about speaking in low tones on the ‘Negro
Problem’; black people were ‘coloured people’, they wanted only the same
simple things uncoloured people wanted (‘we’re just folks’). Whereupon
whites obligingly filtered their vision to screen out the obvious
physical, cultural, and psychological differences. Words like ‘nigger’
were dropped. Statements like, ‘Would you want your sister to marry
one?’ became unforgivable bad taste, a sign of poor breeding. ‘You’re
prejudiced!’ was the accusation of the year. And Martin Luther King
masterfully utilized this guilt, turning liberal Christian rhetoric back
on itself.

But then came Black Power. A rumble of I-told-you-sos issued from the
nation, especially from the working class, who were closest to the
blacks: what they really want is our power – they’re after our women.
Eldridge Cleaver’s honesty in Soul on Ice clinched it. The heavily
sexual nature of the racial issue spilled out. Internally as well, the
Black Power movement was increasingly involved in a special kind of
machismo, as busy proclaiming manhood as protesting race and class
injustice.

But it was not the machismo element of Black Power that shook up its
enemies. This part of it was rarely questioned by the Establishment
proper, by the liberal Establishment (in fact, Moynihan’s paper on
‘black matriarchy’ can be said to have created that massive castration
complex within the black community which he describes), or even by the
New Left. It was eminently understandable, after all, that black men
would eventually want what all men want: to be on top of their women. In
fact this part of it was reassuring: black men might become interested
in black beauty instead of white (the wave of recent articles bemoaning
the black woman’s ‘double burden’ and her lack of an appreciative mate
are suspicious), a ‘purity’ of home and family would lead eventually,
perhaps, to conservatism and predictability. No, it was not black
manhood itself that got whites up-tight – it was what manhood means in
action: power. Black men were now out in the open in the male power
struggle: we want what you’ve got, no more tap dances. White men
breathed with relief and began arming: they knew how to cope with this.
For once again, it was men vs. men, one (rigged) power force against the
other. They drew the battle lines with glee.

What is this truth that was censored in order to make the civil rights
movement acceptable to white America? What is the connection between sex
and racism that makes any book on it sell so well? Why are the fears of
the common man so sexual in nature when it comes to the Negro? Why does
just the sight of a Negro so often evoke strong sexual feelings in a
white man? Why do black men lust after white women? Why is racial
prejudice so often phrased in sexual terms? Why does lynching, often
accompanied by castration, occur as the most extreme manifestation of
racism?

The connection between sex and racism is obviously much deeper than
anyone has cared to go. But though the connection has never been more
than superficially explored, already in the one decade of the new
movement we have a new set of platitudes concerning sex and race, a new
dogma for the ‘hips’. For example, in the Who’s Who of Oppression, a
ranking of white man–white woman–black woman–black man is still in
circulation, despite recent statistics of the Department of
Labor.[1](#part0017.html#chapter5-1) Then there is the Brains vs. Brawn
Antagonism, as developed by Mailer, Podhoretz, et al., and continued by
Cleaver, basically the mystique of the black man’s greater virility. And
the Black Womb of Africa, Big Black Mammy in African garb. But this
superficial exposure of sex-racism was meant only to seal up the issue a
different way, this time in the interests of the male
Anti-Establishment.

In this chapter I shall attempt to show that racism is a sexual
phenomenon. Like sexism in the individual psyche, we can fully
understand racism only in terms of the power hierarchies of the family:
in the Biblical sense, the races are no more than the various parents
and siblings of the Family of Man; and as in the development of sexual
classes, the physiological distinction of race became important
culturally only due to the unequal distribution of power. Thus, racism
is sexism extended.

I

THE RACIAL FAMILY: OEDIPUS/ELECTRA, THE ETERNAL TRIANGLE, THE
BROTHEL-BEHIND-THE-SCENES

Let us look at race relations in America,[2](#part0017.html#chapter5-2)
a macrocosm of the hierarchical relations within the nuclear family: the
white man is father, the white woman wife-and-mother, her status
dependent on his; the blacks, like children, are his property, their
physical differentiation branding them the subservient class, in the
same way that children form so easily distinguishable a servile class
vis-à-vis adults. This power hierarchy creates the psychology of racism,
just as, in the nuclear family, it creates the psychology of sexism.

Previously we have described the Oedipus Complex in the male as that
neurosis resulting from enforced subservience to the power of the
father. Let us apply this interpretation to the psychology of the black
male. The black male at first makes a sympathetic identification with
the white female, who is also visibly oppressed by the white man.
Because both have been ‘castrated’ (i.e. made impotent, powerless) in
the same way by the Father, there is much similarity in the types of
psychological oppressions they each must endure, in the sex-repressive
nature of these oppressions – and thus in their resulting character
formations. They have a special bond in oppression in the same way that
the mother and child are united against the father.

This accounts for the white woman’s frequent identification with the
black man personally, and in a more political form, from the
abolitionist movement (cf. Harriet Beecher Stowe) to our present black
movement. The vicarious nature of this struggle against the white man’s
dominion is akin to the mother’s vicarious identification with the son
against the father. The woman has no real hope of her own
self-determined struggle, for her it’s all lost from the beginning: she
is defined in toto as the appendage of the white man, she lives under
his day-to-day surveillance isolated from her sisters: she has less
aggressive strength. But the mother (white female) knows that if not
herself, then at least her son (black male) is potentially ‘male’, that
is, powerful.

But while some women may still attempt to achieve their freedom
vicariously through the struggle of the black man or other racially
oppressed (also biologically distinct) groups, many other women have
resigned from this struggle altogether. Instead they choose to embrace
their oppression, identifying their own interests with those of their
men in the vain hope that power may rub off; their solution has been to
obliterate their own poor egos – often by love – in order to merge
completely into the powerful egos of their men.

This hopeless identification is the racism of white women – which
perhaps produces an even greater bitterness in black men than the more
immediately understandable racism of these women’s husbands; for it
betokens a betrayal by the Mother. Yet it is an inauthentic form of
racism, for it arises from a false class consciousness, from the threat
to what is, after all, only an illusion of power. If and when it is as
strong as or stronger than the white man’s racism, it is still different
in kind: it is characterized by a peculiar hysteria, which, like the
conservatism of the black bourgeoisie – or like the wife screaming at
her husband that he treats the children better than he treats her – is,
in itself, directly the product of the precariousness of her own
class(less) situation. Thus the black man may become a scapegoat for the
venom the woman feels for her husband, but is incapable of admitting
directly.

So the white woman tends to oscillate between either a vicarious
identification with the black man or a hysterical (but in-authentic)
racism. Radical women, who, like most women, suffer from
benefit-of-the-doubtism towards men in general, especially tend to trust
and sympathize with black men – and then are often bitterly
disillusioned when black men take personal advantage of them, or when
the black movement does not move quickly enough to support the woman’s
cause.

For it is seldom all love and sympathy on the part of the black male
either. To return to our analogy: just as the child begins with a bond
of sympathy with the mother, and is soon required to transfer his
identification from the mother to the father, thus to eradicate the
female in himself, so too the black male, in order to ‘be a man’, must
untie himself from his bond with the white female, relating to her if at
all only in a degrading way. In addition, due to his virulent hatred and
jealousy of her Possessor, the white man, he may lust after her as a
thing to be conquered in order to ‘get whitey’. Thus, unlike the more
clear-cut polarization of feelings in white women, the black man’s
feelings about the white woman are characterized by their ambivalence –
their intense mixture of love and hate; but however he may choose to
express this ambivalence, he is unable to control its intensity.

LeRoi Jones’s early play Dutchman illustrates some of these
psychological tensions and ambivalences in the relationship of the black
man to the white woman. In a subway encounter. Clay, a young bourgeois
black, and Lula, a blonde vampire, personify them: Clay’s contempt for
Lula as the white man’s plaything mixed with a grudging erotic
attraction, her deep and immediate understanding of him, and finally her
betrayal ending with a literal backstab (after which she cries ‘rape’,
getting off scot free – one must presume to destroy more young black men
who were only minding their own business). This is a black man’s inner
view of the white woman. Lula never comes across as a real woman, so
much is she a product of the racial Oedipus Complex I have described.

The relationship of the black man with the white man, similarly,
duplicates the relationship of the male child to the father. We have
seen how at a certain point, in order to assert his ego, the child must
transfer his identification from the female (powerless) to the male
(powerful). He hates the powerful father. But he is offered the
alternative: if he does make that transition (on the father’s terms, of
course), he is rewarded; if he denies it, his ‘manhood’ (humanity) is
called into question. A black man in America can do only one of the
following:

(1) He can give in to the white man on the white man’s terms, and be
paid off by the white man (Uncle Tomism).

(2) He can refuse such an identification altogether, at which he often
surrenders to homosexuality. Or he may continue desperately to try to
prove that if not a ‘man’ in the eyes of white society, at least he is
not a woman (the Pimp Complex): by treating ‘the bitches’ with open
contempt, he demonstrates to all the world that he is in the superior
sex class.

(3) He may attempt to overthrow the Father’s power. Such an attempt may,
but will not necessarily, encompass a wish to become the Father, through
subsuming his position of power.

Unless the black man makes the first choice, identification with the
Father on the Father’s own terms, he is subject to castration
(destruction of his maleness, his illegitimate ‘male’ power),
particularly if he tampers with the Father’s treasure, the cushion for
and embodiment of the Father’s power – his woman. This racial castration
occurs not only metaphorically, but literally, in the form of lynching.

Let us now apply our political interpretation of the Electra Complex to
the psychology of the black woman. If the black man is Son to the
American family, then the black woman is Daughter. Her initial sympathy
with the white woman (mother), her bond of oppression with her (mother)
against the white man (father) is complicated by her later relationship
with the white male (father). When she discovers that the white male
owns that ‘world of travel and adventure’, she, in the subservient
position of child, attempts to identify with him, to reject the female
in herself. (This may be the cause of the greater aggressiveness of the
black woman compared with the docility of her white sisters.) In the
effort to reject the womanly (powerless) element in herself, she
develops contempt for the Mother (white woman). Like the young girl, she
may react to her powerlessness in one of two ways: she may attempt to
gain power directly by imitating white men, thus becoming a ‘big
achiever’, a woman of strong character who rises high (‘especially for a
black woman’), or she may attempt to gain power indirectly by seducing
the Father (voilà the black sexpot), thus putting herself in sexual
competition with the white woman for the Father’s favour – causing her
to hate and be jealous of the white woman, whom she now must attempt to
imitate.

Meanwhile the relationship of the Brother (black man) and Sister (black
woman) is one of rivalry and mutual contempt. Each sees the other as
powerless, a lackey desperately trying to get in good with the Parents
(white man and woman). Each is on to the other’s sexual games. It is
difficult for them to direct their erotic energies towards each other:
they see through each other too well.

We can use the family in another way to illuminate the psychology of
racism. Let us look at racism as a form of the Eternal Triangle. In this
situation the white man is Husband, the white woman is Wife, and the
black woman is the Other Woman. We have seen how this kind of dichotomy
between the ‘good’ and the ‘bad’ woman is in itself a product of the
Oedipus Complex. A man is unable to feel both sex and affection for the
same object, so he must divide up his feelings: for his wife and mother
of his children he feels respect and affection; for the ‘other’ woman,
his sexual receptacle, he feels passion. The further exaggeration of
this division through biological differentiation, e.g.,
colour,[3](#part0017.html#chapter5-3) or economic class distinctions,
makes the acting out of the sexual schizophrenia itself very convenient:
one does not have to bother actually degrading one’s sex object to avoid
the guilt of breaking the incest taboo; her attributes, by social
definition, already render her degraded. (Perhaps the measure of
corruption of the individual male psyche can be judged by the degree to
which it lusts after black flesh as something exotic, erotic, because
forbidden.) The black woman, while made to pay the sexploitation price
of this schism, is at least freed of the enslavement of the family
structure. The white woman, though revered in her role as Mother, is
permanently chained to her own private tyrant.

How do the women of this racial triangle feel about each other? Divide
and Conquer: both women have grown hostile to each other, white women
feeling contempt for the ‘sluts’ with no morals, black women feeling
envy for the pampered ‘powder puffs’. The black woman is jealous of the
white woman’s legitimacy, privilege, and comfort, but she also feels
deep contempt: white women are ‘frigid bitches’ who have it too easy,
leaving black women to do all their white woman’s work – from supplying
their husbands’ sex/passion needs and taking care of their children to
doing their literal dirty work (‘help’). Similarly, the white woman’s
contempt for the black woman is mixed with envy: for the black woman’s
greater sexual licence, for her gutsiness, for her freedom from the
marriage bind. For after all, the black woman is not under the thumb of
a man, but is pretty much her own boss to come and go, to leave the
house, to work (much as it is degrading work) or to be ‘shiftless’. What
the white woman doesn’t know is that the black woman, not under the
thumb of one man, can now be squashed by all. There is no alternative
for either of them than the choice between being public or private
property, but because each still believes that the other is getting away
with something, both can be fooled into mischanneling their frustration
on to each other, rather than on to the real enemy, ‘The Man’.

If, in the white man’s sex drama, the white woman plays Wife (his
private property), and the black woman plays Whore (his public
property), what role does the black man play? The black man plays Pimp.
The black man is a pawn in the game of the white man’s sexuality. For as
we have seen, the black man is not a complete man, nor yet a homosexual
(who has given up the struggle for male identity altogether), but a
degraded male. (That pimp signifies ‘degrading male’ is borne out by the
fact that in the male code to call someone a pimp is tantamount to
setting up a duel. I have pointed out that degrading animal terms for
the male as well as the female occur regularly only in ghetto slang –
stud, cat, dude, spade, jack, etc.) The black man’s malehood is so
questioned by The Man that it registers only in terms of his power over
and domination of women, who are at least more powerless than himself.
Because women are his major weapon in the war of masculinity with the
white man, his relation to them becomes corrupted – not like that of man
over woman, husband over wife, but like that of pimp over whore. His
patronage of the black woman is a false one: though he may even, at
times, protect her from the evils of the marketplace, he does so for his
own interests. But even when the black man most appears to be her
primary exploiter, he is in reality only the indirect agent of her
exploitation. For though he may play the mares of his ‘stable’ against
each other, drink and gamble away their money (the hard-won fruits of
their direct exploitation by the white man), beat them, and call them
names, it will never qualify him as a real man. The real man, as they
both know, is The Man. He alone can confer legitimacy on either the
black male or the black female. And again, as in his Wife–Whore
triangle, he keeps both the Pimp and the Whore dangling, fighting with
him through each other. Most of the tensions of these overlapping
triangles appear in the following short quote by a black woman addressed
to her man:

Of course you will say, ‘How can I love you and want to be with you when
I come home and you’re looking like a slob? Why, white women never open
the door for their husbands the way you black bitches do.’

I should guess not, you ignorant man. Why should they be in such a state
when they’ve got maids like me to do everything for them? There is no
screaming at the kids for her, no standing over the hot stove;
everything is done for her and whether her man loves her or not, he
provides … provides … do you hear that, nigger? PROVIDES!

Gail A. Stokes in ‘Black Woman to Black Man’, Liberator, December, 1968

But it is not only the black man’s relation to black women that is
corrupted by his preoccupation with the white man. For though the black
woman may give her last dollar to buy the black man a drink, her real
involvement, too, is with the white man. Here is The Infidel speaking,
from Cleaver’s ‘Allegory of the Black Eunuchs’:

Ever since then I always believed that marrying a white man, to a black
woman, is like adding the final star to her crown. It’s the apex of
achievement in her eyes and in the eyes of her sisters. Look at how many
family black celebrities marry white men. All of the Negro women who are
not celebrities wish they were so that they too, could marry white men.
Whitey is their dream boy. When they kiss you, it ain’t really you
they’re kissing. They close their eyes and picture their white dream
boy. Listen to the grapevine … Jesus Christ the pure is the black
woman’s psychic bridegroom. You will learn before you die that during
coition and at the moment of her orgasm, the black woman, in the first
throes of her spasm, shouts out the name of Jesus. ‘Oh Jesus, I’m
coming!’ she shouts to him. And to you it will hurt. It will be like a
knife in your heart. It will be the same as if your woman, during
orgasm, calls out the name of some sneaky cat who lives down the block.

Thus the black woman has as much contempt for the black man as he has
for her – a real man could elevate her through marriage, by virtue of
his superior class. She can’t respect the black man, because she knows
he has no power. The white man at least ‘provides’ for his women, and
doesn’t beat them. The white man is civil, kind, and polite at all
times. She doesn’t see that it is in his interests to be: that way
neither the Pimp nor the Whore will suspect that their Polite White
Customer is responsible for both their destructions.

Thus, the All-American Family is predicated on the existence of the
black ghetto Whorehouse. The rape of the black community in America
makes possible the existence of the family structure of the larger white
community, just as sexual prostitution in general maintains the
respectable middle-class family. The black community is the outgroup
that supplies the sexual needs of the white human family, keeping it
functioning. And that’s why there is no family solidity in the ghetto.

The way this sex/race system is so often recreated in miniature in
private life reveals the depth of the problem. The individual white
household is sustained by the lifelong domestic, as well as sexual,
exploitation of individual black women. Or, the average ghetto youth
does some pimping or even whoring as a matter of course, his value as a
‘man’ measured by the way he is able to command his bitches – and how
many he can command at once. He becomes a master of the smooth line, of
doubletalk. If he is able to string along a white ‘chick’, this is an
added notch on his belt – for it’s a direct blow to the white man
(Father). This explains the frequent pairing of the white whore with the
black pimp: the white woman (Mother) is degraded to whore along with the
black woman, a direct slap at the white man. She is the Father’s most
precious property, now sold back to him as damaged merchandise. As for
the white whore herself – in those few cases where it was a matter of
choice – she has expressed the ultimate in masochism. She becomes
totally the prey of the white man, rubbing his nose in her acquiescence
to the extreme humiliation: a black pimp.

II

‘BLACK MANHOOD’

What is the attitude of the militant black community to this
psychosexual degradation that is racism? I have stated that the black
male has three choices in reacting to the white male’s power over him.

(1) He can submit on the terms set up by the white male (at best to
become a black celebrity – comedian, athlete, or musician – or a member
of the black bourgeoisie).

(2) He can refuse the identification altogether, with all the
consequences of being defined as less than ‘a man’ (the ravaged ghetto
youth I have described).

(3)He can try to revolt and overthrow the Father, which may include
stealing that power position for himself (political organization for
revolution, especially the recent militance).

The black movement has chosen the third alternative, by far the
healthiest. But how does it plan to accomplish this? One way is to unite
with the white forces that are also attempting the same
thing.[4](#part0017.html#chapter5-4) The Family once again: the white
male left is the weakling Legitimate Son. The black male is the tough
guy Bastard Brother, the illegitimate son wanting a chance at that
power. The Half-Brothers have made a deal: the disinherited Brother’s
street ‘smarts’ and raw strength of discontent to aid the pampered
neurotic Legitimate Son, in exchange for tactics, rhetoric, and, above
all, for a promise of a portion of that son’s birthright when he attains
the throne. What the two brothers are really talking about is not
justice and equality but (male) power.

And who is Little Sister? White women on the Left are allowed to tag
along, occasionally, if they do the dirty work; but more often they get
put down, and left out (‘pests,’ with their constant demands for
inclusion, throwing tantrums at any little ‘male chauvinist’ remark).
The Sister fools herself, identifying so strongly with Big Brother that
she actually at times begins to believe herself just like him. She finds
it harder and harder to identify with that dimming mass of ordinary
women out there (Mother) whom she must kill in herself in order to win
Big Brother’s approval. He encourages her in this. He knows illusions of
her coming power will make her more docile in the long run. She can be
useful, especially in getting at the Father.

Moreover, the Brothers have made a blood pact: you give me your chicks
(the Bastard Son fulfils his fantasies on Little Sister while His
Lordship pretends not to notice), and I’ll give you mine (the white boy
gets his first real screw while the bastard brother snickers).

And the black sister? Black male militants, going for the ‘legit’ this
time, are reordering their sexuality to conform with the going model.
Attempts are now being made to institute the family in the black
community, to transform the black community from Whorehouse for the
white family to Black Family. The black woman is being converted from
her previous role, Whore, to Revered-Black-Queen-Mother-of-My-Children.
Thus, the Bastard Son has assumed the role of Father within his own
community in anticipation of his coming power. Here is a much-circulated
poster, tacked up in an East Village store window:

BLACK GOLD

\[a large formidable profile of a black woman in an Afro\]

 

I AM THE BLACK WOMAN, MOTHER OF CIVILIZATION, QUEEN OF THE UNIVERSE.
THROUGH ME THE BLACK MAN PRODUCES HIS NATION.

If he does not protect his woman he will not produce a good nation.

It is my duty to teach and train the young, who are the future of the
nation.

I teach my children the language, history, and culture when they are
very young.

I teach them to love and respect their father, who works hard so that
they may have adequate food, clothing, and shelter.

I care and make our home comfortable for my husband.

I reflect his love to the children as the moon reflects the light from
the sun to the earth.

I sit and talk with my husband to work out the daily problems and
necessities of running a stable and peaceful household.

The best that I can give my nation is strong, healthy, intelligent
children who will grow to be the leaders of tomorrow.

I’m always aware that the true worth of a nation is reflected through
the respect and protection of the woman, so I carry myself in a
civilized manner at all times, and teach my children to do the same.

I am the Black Woman.

But such a transformation, when it succeeds, is based on fantasy, for as
long as the white man is still in power, he has the privilege to define
the black community as he chooses – they are dependent on him for their
very survival – and the psychosexual consequences of this inferior
definition must continue to operate. Thus the concept of the Dignified
Black Family rarely penetrates beyond the circles of the Copycat
Bourgeoisie or the True Believer Revolutionaries. Indeed, one would have
to believe fanatically in the Revolution to fight off the mind sets
resulting from the present sex/race system; one could embrace such a
foreign structure only through steadfast visionary anticipation of a
different world. That hard-core ghetto youth aren’t eager to put such a
family structure into practice is understandable: daily they are at the
mercy of the real sexual needs of the White Family; they can’t afford
not to live with their unpleasant reality or to forget for a moment who
has the power. In this respect black revolutionaries are as dangerous as
a small band of Nat Turners trying to institute marriage in the slave
quarters in anticipation of the coming rebellion. And, all exhortations
to the contrary, even the revolutionaries have a hard time purging
themselves of the sex/race psychology, finding themselves still
irresistibly drawn to the ‘white she-devils’. For it lies too deep in
their psyches, backed up by the day-to-day realities of power. Here is
Cleaver battling with himself:

One day I saw in a magazine a picture of the white woman who had flirted
with \[and thus caused the death of\] Emmett Till. While looking at the
picture, I felt a little tension in the center of my chest I experience
when a woman appeals to me. I looked at the picture again and again and
in spite of everything and against my will and my hate for the woman and
everything she represented, she appealed to me. I flew into a rage at
myself, at America, at white women, at the history that had placed those
tensions of lust and desire in my chest. Two days later I had a ‘nervous
breakdown’.

Cleaver’s greatest virtue as a writer is his honesty. In Soul on Ice we
have the psychology of the black man, particularly the consuming
love/hate for the ‘Ogre’ (white woman). In fact Cleaver’s development
contains most of the ambivalences we have described. We are given some
idea of what his previous attitude towards (black) women was before he
here falls in love with a (white) woman:

I even respect you behind your back. I have a bad habit, when speaking
of women while only men are present, of referring to women as bitches.
This bitch this and that bitch that, you know. A while back I was
speaking of you to a couple of cutthroats and I said, ‘this bitch…’ And
I felt very ashamed of myself about that. I passed judgement upon myself
and suffered spiritually for days afterward, This may seem
insignificant, but I attach great importance to it because of the chain
of thought kicked off by it. I care about you, am concerned about you,
which is all very new for, and a sharp departure from, Eldridge X.

(‘Prelude to Love—Three Letters’)

In general, in these letters, originally written to San Francisco lawyer
Beverly Axelrod, Cleaver attempts to rid himself of all the smooth talk,
the clever come-on that is the trademark of the black man. He is not
always successful. One senses that he has to fight with himself; he
catches himself just in time (almost too cleverly) by admitting what he
is doing: ‘NOW TURN THE RECORD OVER AND PLAY THE OTHER SIDE: I have
tried to mislead you. I am not humble at all.’ But when Beverly
expresses cynicism about his love, he assures her elaborately that she
must ‘open up’ to him, trust him.

Beverly was right. Her female cynicism, as usual, was more than
justified – she wasn’t cynical enough. (Cleaver, to set an example,
married just-black-enough Kathleen, leaving Beverly stranded. Latest
pictures include an infant son.) His letters to Beverly, about as
personalized and honest as probably he will ever get towards any woman,
are followed by a florid letter (testimonial? doctrine?) To All Black
Women From All Black Men. Its balls-and-womb imagery includes such gems
as: ‘Across the naked abyss of my negated masculinity, of four hundred
years \[!\] minus my balls, we face each other today, my queen.’ He
reminds her that: ‘Torrents of blood flow today from my crotch…’ And
finally, triumphantly: ‘I have entered the den and seized my balls from
the teeth of a roaring lion…’ His pages-long incantations to the Black
Womb of Africa are, to say the least, hardly the best way to go about
flattering a woman.

For despite his address to Black Womanhood (‘Queen-Mother-Daughter of
Africa, Sister of My Soul, Black Bride of My Passion, My Eternal Love’)
Cleaver, in this supposed love letter, is hung up on himself, and on his
‘masculinity’. There is no conception of the black woman as a human
being in her own right; she is merely a buttress for his own (masculine)
self-image. The same old trick in revolutionary guise: the male defining
himself negatively as man-strong by distinguishing himself from
woman-weak, through his control of her – like the pimp who rejects the
female in himself, achieving a false sense of manhood (power) through
domination of all females in his vicinity. The sexual nature of
Cleaver’s racial agonies is revealed in his attack on Baldwin, which is
no more than the vicious attack of the Black Pimp on the Black Queen.
The Queen has chosen to give up the male (power) identification
altogether rather than accept the degrading sexual definition handed
down by the white man, thus threatening the Pimp, who is fighting a
losing battle. And if this attack weren’t enough, Cleaver gives away his
sexual insecurity through his superstud self-image – Norman Mailer in
black. Some promotion, judging by the hysterics of his chestpounding.

The transformation of the black woman into the traditional passive
female creates a useful negative backdrop against which the black male’s
own definition of himself as masculine (aggressive) can emerge. And in
her capacity as springboard, or practice bouting-dummy, the black woman
is valuable and must be ‘humbly’ wooed; her cooperation is important,
for the black man can only be the ‘man’ if someone becomes the ‘woman’.

Black women, so hip to ‘lines’, seem to have fallen for this one. Here
is a rebuke written by another black woman in reply to the accusation of
black men by Gail A. Stokes that I have quoted above. It is noted for
its female antiwomanism:

Sure \[black men\] blunder and make mistakes, but don’t we? This is
normal for someone trying something new, i.e. leadership … So how could
you, Gail Stokes, scrounge up the audacity to prick the Black man’s
balloon! How could you dare to attempt to break his winning streak? Did
it ever occur to you that it is you, in fact, who is inadequate? Check
yourself, sister; a woman reflects her man.

She turns to the black man:

Black men: I too have heard your cry, ringing from within your newfound
pride, and African garb. And to that cry I reply: Take your rightful
place ahead of me, my love … Yes, my Black man, you’re a real man, a
rare man. And in all your struggles I want you to know that I struggle
only a few steps behind you, for that is my place in your life … You are
all I am here for.

She then assuages his pricked ego by assuring him of her undying loyalty
to his balls:

Having your balls torn from you and still trying to be a man! Oh, those
anguished moments of puberty … those growing pains … Tell me how many
men have been castrated only to defy that emasculation and grow new
balls! … You need to be held and loved and told how wonderful you really
are.

Edith R. Hambrick, ‘Black Woman to Black woman’, Liberator, December,
1968.

(Italics hers. And notice the capitalization of the title: a warning to
the sister to start toeing the line?)

But when she does toe the line, her reward will not be a personalized
kind of love (as in the letters to Beverly Axelrod) but an impersonal
one addressed through her to all Black Womanhood. Here is Bobby Seale
from his much-published Letter To My Wife (like the budding poet’s
inscription on his girlfriend’s Christmas gifts, inevitably appearing in
the spring issue of the college poetry journal):

Artie Honey …

Now if I ain’t in love with you because I saw something on your face the
other morning that said you were a revolutionary, then something is
wrong … What’s Malik \[their three-year-old son\] doing? Teach him how
to serve the people by your examples, Artie … Artie, I hope you are not
being selfish and keeping this letter to yourself. Aw, I know you are
reading it to the other party members …

Why do black women, so shrewd about their men in general, settle for
this patronizing, impersonal, and uninspired kind of love? Because of
the triangle: as we have seen, the black woman has played Whore, used
and abused by white men (her ‘tricks’) and black men (her ‘pimps’) for
centuries. All this time she has looked with envy at the white woman’s
legitimacy and security. Now, offered that legitimacy, under whatever
crude guise, she is tempted to set it up for herself, not knowing the
horrors in store. The Wife is the only one who could tell her, but they
are not on speaking terms. For, as we have seen, each has learned to
focus her frustrations on the other. Their long antagonism makes it hard
for them to trade the valuable (and painful) lessons they have learned
about the Man. If they could, they might soon discover that neither Wife
nor Whore grants freedom, for neither of these roles is self-determined.
They might alert to Eldridge Cleaver’s warning, as he anticipates his
future male power, in one of his rare moments of honesty with women:

NOW TURN THE RECORD OVER AND PLAY THE OTHER SIDE: I have tried to
mislead you. I am not humble at all. I have no humility and I do not
fear you in the least. If I pretend to be shy, if I appear to hesitate,
it is only a sham to deceive. By playing the humble part, I sucker my
fellow men and seduce them of their trust. And then if it suits my
advantage, I lower the boom mercilessly. I lied when I stated that I had
no sense of myself. I am very well aware of my style. My vanity is as
vast as the scope of a dream, my heart is that of a tyrant, my arm is
the arm of the executioner. It is only the failure of my plots I fear.

6 Love

A book on radical feminism that did not deal with love would be a
political failure. For love, perhaps even more than child-bearing, is
the pivot of women’s oppression today. I realize this has frightening
implications: do we want to get rid of love?

The panic felt at any threat to love is a good clue to its political
significance. Another sign that love is central to any analysis of women
or sex psychology is its omission from culture itself, its relegation to
‘personal life’. (And whoever heard of logic in the bedroom?) Yes, it is
portrayed in novels, even metaphysics, but in them it is described, or
better, re-created, not analysed. Love has never been understood, though
it may have been fully experienced, and that experience communicated.

There is reason for this absence of analysis: women and love are
underpinnings. Examine them and you threaten the very structure of
culture.

The tired question ‘What were women doing while men created
masterpieces?’ deserves more than the obvious reply: women were barred
from culture, exploited in their role of mother. Or its reverse: women
had no need for paintings since they created children. Love is tied to
culture in much deeper ways than that. Men were thinking, writing, and
creating, because women were pouring their energy into those men; women
are not creating culture because they are preoccupied with love.

That women live for love and men for work is a truism. Freud was the
first to attempt to ground this dichotomy in the individual psyche: the
male child, sexually rejected by the first person in his attention, his
mother, ‘sublimates’ his ‘libido’ – his reservoir of sexual (life)
energies – into long-term projects, in the hope of gaining love in a
more generalized form; thus he displaces his need for love into a need
for recognition. This process does not occur as much in the female: most
women never stop seeking direct warmth and approval.

There is also much truth in the clichés that ‘behind every man there is
a woman’, and that ‘women are the power behind \[read: voltage in\] the
throne’. (Male) Culture was built on the love of women, and at their
expense. Women provided the substance of those male masterpieces; and
for millennia they have done the work, and suffered the costs, of
one-way emotional relationships the benefits of which went to men and to
the work of men. So if women are a parasitical class living off, and at
the margins of, the male economy, the reverse too is true: (male)
culture is parasitical, feeding on the emotional strength of women
without reciprocity.

Moreover, we tend to forget that this culture is not universal, but
rather sectarian, presenting only half the spectrum of experience. The
very structure of culture itself, as we shall see, is saturated with the
sexual polarity, as well as being in every degree run by, for, and in
the interests of male society. But while the male half is termed all of
culture, men have not forgotten there is a female ‘emotional’ half: they
live it on the sly. As the result of their battle to reject the female
in themselves (the Oedipus Complex as we have explained it) they are
unable to take love seriously as a cultural matter; but they can’t do
without it altogether. Love is the underbelly of (male) culture just as
love is the weak spot of every man, bent on proving his virility in that
large male world of ‘travel and adventure’. Women have always known how
men need love, and how they deny this need. Perhaps this explains the
peculiar contempt women so universally feel for men (‘men are so dumb’),
for they can see their men are posturing in the outside world.

I

How does this phenomenon ‘love’ operate?

Contrary to popular opinion, love is not altruistic. The initial
attraction is based on curious admiration (more often today, envy and
resentment) for the self-possession, the integrated unity, of the other
and a wish to become part of this Self in some way (today, read: intrude
or take over), to become important to in that psychic balance. The
self-containment of the other creates desire (read: a challenge);
admiration (envy) of the other becomes a wish to incorporate (possess)
its qualities. A clash of selves follows in which the individual
attempts to fight off the growing hold over him of the other. Love is
the final opening up to (or, surrender to the dominion of) the other.
The lover demonstrates to the beloved how he himself would like to be
treated. (‘I tried so hard to make him fall in love with me that I fell
in love with him myself.’) Thus love is the height of selfishness: the
self attempts to enrich itself through the absorption of another being.
Love is being psychically wide-open to another. It is a situation of
total emotional vulnerability. Therefore it must be not only the
incorporation of the other, but an exchange of selves. Anything short of
a mutual exchange will hurt one or the other party.

There is nothing inherently destructive about this process. A little
healthy selfishness would be a refreshing change. Love between two
equals would be an enrichment, each enlarging himself through the other:
instead of being one, locked in the cell of himself with only his own
experience and view, he could participate in the existence of another –
an extra window on the world. This accounts for the bliss that
successful lovers experience: lovers are temporarily freed from the
burden of isolation that every individual bears.

But bliss in love is seldom the case: for every successful contemporary
love experience, for every short period of enrichment, there are ten
destructive love experiences, post-love ‘downs’ of much longer duration
– often resulting in the destruction of the individual, or at least an
emotional cynicism that makes it difficult or impossible ever to love
again. Why should this be so, if it is not actually inherent in the love
process itself?

Let’s talk about love in its destructive guise – and why it gets that
way, referring once more to the work of Theodor Reik. Reik’s concrete
observation brings him closer than many better minds to understanding
the process of ‘falling in love’, but he is off insofar as he confuses
love as it exists in our present society with love itself. He notes that
love is a reaction formation, a cycle of envy, hostility, and
possessiveness: he sees that it is preceded by dissatisfaction with
oneself, a yearning for something better, created by a discrepancy
between the ego and the ego-ideal; that the bliss love produces is due
to the resolution of this tension by the substitution, in place of one’s
own ego-ideal, of the other; and finally that love fades ‘because the
other can’t live up to your high ego-ideal any more than you could, and
the judgement will be the harsher the higher are the claims on oneself.
Thus in Reik’s view love wears down just as it wound up: dissatisfaction
with oneself (whoever heard of falling in love the week one is leaving
for Europe?) leads to astonishment at the other person’s
self-containment; to envy; to hostility; to possessive love; and back
again through exactly the same process. This is the love process today.
But why must it be this way?

Many, for example Denis de Rougemont in Love in the Western World, have
tried to draw a distinction between romantic ‘falling in love’ with its
‘false reciprocity which disguises a twin narcissism’ (the Pagan Eros)
and an unselfish love for the other person as that person really is (the
Christian Agape). De Rougemont attributes the morbid passion of Tristan
and Iseult (romantic love) to a vulgarization of specific mystical and
religious currents in Western civilization.

I submit that love is essentially a much simpler phenomenon – it becomes
complicated, corrupted, or obstructed by an unequal balance of power. We
have seen that love demands a mutual vulnerability or it turns
destructive: the destructive effects of love occur only in a context of
inequality. But because sexual inequality has remained a constant –
however its degree may have varied – the corruption ‘romantic’ love
became characteristic of love between the sexes. (It remains for us only
to explain why it has steadily increased in Western countries since the
medieval period, which we shall attempt to do in the following chapter.)

How does the sex class system based on the unequal power distribution of
the biological family affect love between the sexes? In discussing
Freudianism, we have gone into the psychic structuring of the individual
within the family and how this organization of personality must be
different for the male and the female because of their very different
relationships to the mother. At present the insular interdependency of
the mother/child relationship forces both male and female children into
anxiety about losing the mother’s love, on which they depend for
physical survival. When later (Erich Fromm notwithstanding) the child
learns that the mother’s love is conditional, to be rewarded the child
in return for approved behaviour (that is, behaviour in line with the
mother’s own values and personal ego gratification – for she is free to
mould the child ‘creatively’, however she happens to define that), the
child’s anxiety turns into desperation. This, coinciding with the sexual
rejection of the male child by the mother, causes, as we have seen, a
schizophrenia in the boy between the emotional and the physical, and in
the girl, the mother’s rejection, occurring for different reasons,
produces an insecurity about her identity in general, creating a
lifelong need for approval. (Later her lover replaces her father as a
grantor of the necessary surrogate identity – she sees everything
through his eyes.) Here originates the hunger for love that later sends
both sexes searching in one person after the other for a state of ego
security. But because of the early rejection, to the degree that it
occurred, the male will be terrified of committing himself, of ‘opening
up’ and then being smashed. How this affects his sexuality we have seen:
to the degree that a woman is like his mother, the incest taboo operates
to restrain his total sexual/emotional commitment; for him to feel
safely the kind of total response he first felt for his mother, which
was rejected, he must degrade this woman so as to distinguish her from
the mother. This behaviour reproduced on a larger scale explains many
cultural phenomena, including perhaps the ideal love-worship of
chivalric times, the forerunner of modern romanticism.

Romantic idealization is partially responsible, at least on the part of
men, for a peculiar characteristic of ‘falling’ in love: the change
takes place in the lover almost independently of the character of the
love object. Occasionally the lover, though beside himself, sees with
another rational part of his faculties that, objectively speaking, the
one he loves isn’t worth all this blind devotion; but he is helpless to
act on this, ‘a slave to love’. More often he fools himself entirely.
But others can see what is happening (‘How on earth he could love her is
beyond me!’). This idealization occurs much less frequently on the part
of women, as is borne out by Reik’s clinical studies. A man must
idealize one woman over the rest in order to justify his descent to a
lower caste. Women have no such reason to idealize men – in fact, when
one’s life depends on one’s ability to ‘psych’ men out, such
idealization may actually be dangerous – though a fear of male power in
general may carry over into relationships with individual men, appearing
to be the same phenomenon. But though women know to be inauthentic this
male ‘falling in love’, all women, in one way or another, require proof
of it from men before they can allow themselves to love (genuinely, in
their case) in return. For this idealization process acts to equalize
artificially the two parties, a minimum precondition for the development
of an uncorrupted love – we have seen that love requires a mutual
vulnerability that is impossible to achieve in an unequal power
situation. Thus ‘falling in love’ is no more than the process of
alteration of male vision – through idealization, mystification,
glorification – that renders void the woman’s class inferiority.

However, the woman knows that this idealization, which she works so hard
to produce, is a lie, and that it is only a matter of time before he
‘sees through her’. Her life is a hell, vacillating between an
all-consuming need for male love and approval to raise her from her
class subjection, to persistent feelings of inauthenticity when she does
achieve his love. Thus her whole identity hangs in the balance of her
love life. She is allowed to love herself only if a man finds her worthy
of love.

But if we could eliminate the political context of love between the
sexes, would we not have some degree of idealization remaining in the
love process itself? I think so. For the process occurs in the same
manner whoever the love choice: the lover ‘opens up’ to the other.
Because of this fusion of egos, in which each sees and cares about the
other as a new self, the beauty/character of the beloved, perhaps hidden
to outsiders under layers of defences, is revealed. ‘I wonder what she
sees in him’, then, means not only, ‘She is a fool, blinded with
romanticism’, but, ‘Her love has lent her x-ray vision. Perhaps we are
missing something.’ (Note that this phrase is most commonly used about
women. The equivalent phrase about men’s slavery to love is more often
something like, ‘She has him wrapped around her finger’, she has him so
‘snowed’ that he is the last one to see through her.) Increased
sensitivity to the real, if hidden, values of the other, however, is not
‘blindness’ or ‘idealization’ but is, in fact, deeper vision. It is only
the false idealization we have described above that is responsible for
the destruction. Thus it is not the process of love itself that is at
fault, but its political, i.e. unequal power context: the who, why, when
and where of it is what makes it now such a holocaust.

II

But sophisms about love are only one more symptom of its diseased state.
(As one female patient of Reik so astutely put it, ‘Men take love either
too seriously or not seriously enough.’) Let’s look at it more
concretely, as we now experience it in its corrupted form. Once again we
shall quote from the Reikian Confessional. For if Reik’s work has any
value it is where he might least suspect, i.e. in his ‘trivial feminine’
urge to ‘gossip’. Here he is, justifying himself (one supposes his
Superego is troubling him):

A has-been like myself must always be somewhere and working on
something. Why should I not occupy myself with those small questions
that are not often posed and yet perhaps can be answered? The ‘petites
questions’ have a legitimate place beside the great and fundamental
problems of psychoanalysis.

It takes moral courage to write about certain things, as for example
about a game that little girls play in the intervals between classes. Is
such a theme really worthy of a serious psychoanalyst who has passed his
77th year? (Italics mine)

And he reminds himself: ‘But in psychoanalysis there are no unimportant
thoughts; there are only thoughts that pretend to be unimportant in
order not to be told.’ Thus he rationalizes what in fact may be the only
valuable contribution of his work. Here are his patients of both sexes
speaking for themselves about their love lives:

WOMEN:

Later on he called me a sweet girl … I didn’t answer … what could I
say?… but I knew I was not a sweet girl at all and that he sees me as
someone I’m not.

No man can love a girl the way a girl loves a man.

I can go a long time without sex, but not without love.

It’s like H2O instead of water.

I sometimes think that all men are sex-crazy and sex-starved. All they
can think about when they are with a girl is going to bed with her.

Have I nothing to offer this man but this body?

I took off my dress and my bra and stretched myself out on his bed and
waited. For an instant I thought of myself as an animal of sacrifice on
the altar.

I don’t understand the feelings of men. My husband has me. Why does he
need other women? What have they got that I haven’t got?

Believe me, if all wives whose husbands had affairs left them, we would
only have divorced women in this country.

After my husband had quite a few affairs, I flirted with the fantasy of
taking a lover. Why not? What’s sauce for the gander is sauce for the
goose … But I was stupid as a goose: I didn’t have it in me to have an
extramarital affair.

I asked several people whether men also sometimes cry themselves to
sleep. I don’t believe it.

MEN (for further illustration, see Screw):

It’s not true that only the external appearance of a woman matters. The
underwear is also important.

It’s not difficult to make it with a girl. What’s difficult is to make
an end of it.

The girl asked me whether I cared for her mind. I was tempted to answer
I cared more for her behind.

‘Are you going already?’ she said when she opened her eyes. It was a
bedroom cliché whether I left after an hour or after two days.

Perhaps it’s necessary to fool the woman and to pretend you love her.
But why should I fool myself?

When she is sick, she turns me off. But when I’m sick she feels sorry
for me and is more affectionate than usual.

It’s not enough for my wife that I have to hear her talking all the time
– blah, blah, blah. She also expects me to hear what she is saying.

Simone de Beauvoir said it: ‘The word love has by no means the same
sense for both sexes, and this is one cause of the serious
misunderstandings which divide them.’ Above I have illustrated some of
the traditional differences between men and women in love that come up
so frequently in parlour discussions of the ‘double standard’, where it
is generally agreed: that women are monogamous, better at loving,
possessive, ‘clinging’, more interested in (highly involved)
‘relationships’ than in sex per se, and they confuse affection with
sexual desire. That men are interested in nothing but a screw (Wham,
bam, thank you M’am!), or else romanticize the woman ridiculously; that
once sure of her, they become notorious philanderers, never satisfied;
that they mistake sex for emotion. All this bears out what we have
discussed – the difference in the psychosexual organizations of the two
sexes, determined by the first relationship to the mother.

I draw three conclusions based on these differences:

(1) That men can’t love. (Male hormones?? Women traditionally expect and
accept an emotional invalidism in men that they would find intolerable
in a woman.)

(2) That women’s ‘clinging’ behaviour is necessitated by their objective
social situation.

(3) That this situation has not changed significantly from what it ever
was.

Men can’t love. We have seen why it is that men have difficulty loving
and that while men may love, they usually ‘fall in love’ – with their
own projected image. Most often they are pounding down a woman’s door
one day, and thoroughly disillusioned with her the next; but it is rare
for women to leave men, and then it is usually for more than ample
reason.

It is dangerous to feel sorry for one’s oppressor – women are especially
prone to this failing – but I am tempted to do it in this case. Being
unable to love is hell. This is the way it proceeds: as soon as the man
feels any pressure from the other partner to commit himself, he panics
and may react in one of several ways:

(1) He may rush out and screw ten other women to prove that the first
woman has no hold over him. If she accepts this, he may continue to see
her on this basis. The other women verify his (false) freedom; periodic
arguments about them keep his panic at bay. But the women are a paper
tiger, for nothing very deep could be happening with them anyway: he is
balancing them against each other so that none of them can get much of
him. Many smart women, recognizing this to be only a safety valve on
their man’s anxiety, give him ‘a long leash’. For the real issue under
all the fights about other women is that the man is unable to commit
himself.

(2) He may consistently exhibit unpredictable behaviour, standing her up
frequently, being indefinite about the next date, telling her that ‘my
work comes first’, or offering a variety of other excuses. That is,
though he senses her anxiety, he refuses to reassure her in any way, or
even to recognize her anxiety as legitimate. For he needs her anxiety as
a steady reminder that he is still free, that the door is not entirely
closed.

(3) When he is forced into (an uneasy) commitment, he makes her pay for
it: by ogling other women in her presence, by comparing her unfavourably
to past girlfriends or movie stars, by snide reminders in front of
friends that she is his ‘ball and chain’, by calling her a ‘nag’, a
‘bitch’, ‘a shrew’, or by suggesting that if he were only a bachelor he
would be a lot better off. His ambivalence about women’s ‘inferiority’
comes out: by being committed to one, he has somehow made the hated
female identification, which he now must repeatedly deny if he is to
maintain his self-respect in the (male) community. This steady
derogation is not entirely put on: for in fact every other girl suddenly
does look a lot better, he can’t help feeling he has missed something –
and, naturally, his woman is to blame. For he has never given up the
search for the ideal; she has forced him to resign from it. Probably he
will go to his grave feeling cheated, never realizing that there isn’t
much difference between one woman and the other, that it is the loving
that creates the difference.

There are many variations of straining at the bit. Many men go from one
casual thing to another, getting out every time it begins to get hot.
And yet to live without love in the end proves intolerable to men just
as it does to women. The question that remains for every normal male is,
then, how do I get someone to love me without her demanding an equal
commitment in return?

\*   \*   \*

Women’s ‘clinging’ behaviour is required by the objective social
situation. The female response to such a situation of male hysteria at
any prospect of mutual commitment was the development of subtle methods
of manipulation, to force as much commitment as could be forced from
men. Over the centuries strategies have been devised, tested, and passed
on from mother to daughter in secret tetê-à-têtes, passed around at
‘kaffee-klatsches’ (‘I never understand what it is women spend so much
time talking about!’), or, in recent times, via the telephone. These are
not trivial gossip sessions at all (as women prefer men to believe), but
desperate strategies for survival. More real brilliance goes into one
one-hour coed telephone dialogue about men than into that same coed’s
four years of college study, or for that matter, than into most male
political manoeuvres. It is no wonder, then, that even the few women
without ‘family obligations’ always arrive exhausted at the starting
line of any serious endeavour. It takes one’s major energy for the best
portion of one’s creative years to ‘make a good catch’, and a good part
of the rest of one’s life to ‘hold’ that catch. (‘To be in love can be a
full-time job for a woman, like that of a profession for a man.’) Women
who choose to drop out of this race are choosing a life without love,
something that, as we have seen, most men don’t have the courage to do.

But unfortunately the Manhunt is characterized by an emotional urgency
beyond this simple desire for return commitment. It is compounded by the
very class reality that produced the male inability to love in the first
place. In a male-run society that defines women as an inferior and
parasitical class, a woman who does not achieve male approval in some
form is doomed. To legitimate her existence, a woman must be more than
woman, she must continually search for an out from her inferior
definition;[1](#part0017.html#chapter6-1) and men are the only ones in a
position to bestow on her this state of grace. But because the woman is
rarely allowed to realize herself through activity in the larger (male)
society – and when she is, she is seldom granted the recognition she
deserves – it becomes easier to try for the recognition of one man than
of many; and in fact this is exactly the choice most women make. Thus
once more the phenomenon of love, good in itself, is corrupted by its
class context: women must have love not only for healthy reasons but
actually to validate their existence.

In addition, the continued economic dependence of women makes a
situation of healthy love between equals impossible. Women today still
live under a system of patronage: with few exceptions, they have the
choice, not between either freedom or marriage, but between being either
public or private property. Women who merge with a member of the ruling
class can at least hope that some of his privilege will, so to speak,
rub off. But women without men are in the same situation as orphans:
they are a helpless sub-class lacking the protection of the powerful.
This is the antithesis of freedom when they are still (negatively)
defined by a class situation: for now they are in a situation of
magnified vulnerability.

To participate in one’s subjection by choosing one’s master often gives
the illusion of free choice; but in reality a woman is never free to
choose love without ulterior motives. For her at the present time, the
two things, love and status, must remain inextricably intertwined.

Now assuming that a woman does not lose sight of these fundamental
factors of her condition when she loves, she will never be able to love
gratuitously, but only in exchange for security:

(1) the emotional security which, we have seen, she is justified in
demanding;

(2) the emotional identity which she should be able to find through work
and recognition, but which she is denied – thus forcing her to seek her
definition through a man;

(3) the economic class security that, in this society, is attached to
her ability to ‘hook’ a man.

Two of these three demands are invalid conditions for love, but are
imposed on it, weighing it down.

Thus, in their precarious political situation, women can’t afford the
luxury of spontaneous love. It is much too dangerous. The love and
approval of men is all-important. To love thoughtlessly, before one has
ensured return commitment, would endanger that approval. Here is Reik:
‘It finally became clear during psychoanalysis that the patient was
afraid that if she should show a man she loved him, he would consider
her inferior and leave her.’ For once a woman plunges in emotionally,
she will be helpless to play the necessary games: her love would come
first, demanding expression. To pretend a coolness she does not feel,
then, would be too painful, and further, it would be pointless: she
would be cutting off her nose to spite her face, for freedom to love is
what she was aiming for. But in order to guarantee such a commitment,
she must restrain her emotions, she must play games. For, as we have
seen, men do not commit themselves to mutual openness and vulnerability
until they are forced to.

How does she then go about forcing this commitment from the male? One of
her most potent weapons is sex – she can work him up to a state of
physical torment with a variety of games: by denying his need, by
teasing it, by giving and taking back, by jealousy, and so forth. A
woman under analysis wonders why: ‘There are few women who never ask
themselves on certain occasions “How hard should I make it for a man?” I
think no man is troubled with questions of this kind. He perhaps asks
himself only, “When will she give in?”’ Men are right when they complain
that women lack discrimination, that they seldom love a man for his
individual traits but rather for what he has to offer (his class), that
they are calculating, that they use sex to gain other ends, etc. For in
fact women are in no position to love freely. If a woman is lucky enough
to find ‘a decent guy’ to love her and support her, she is doing well –
and usually will be grateful enough to return his love. About the only
discrimination women are able to exercise is the choice between the men
who have chosen them, or a playing off of one male, one power, against
the other. But provoking a man’s interest, and snaring his commitment
once he has expressed that interest, is not exactly self-determination.

Now what happens after she has finally hooked her man, after he has
fallen in love with her and will do anything? She has a new set of
problems. Now she can release the vice, open her net, and examine what
she has caught. Usually she is disappointed. It is nothing she would
have bothered with were she a man. It is usually way below her level.
(Check this out sometime: Talk to a few of those mousy wives.) ‘He may
be a poor thing, but at least I’ve got a man of my own’ is usually more
the way she feels. But at least now she can drop her act. For the first
time it is safe to love – now she must try like hell to catch up to him
emotionally, to really mean what she has pretended all along. Often she
is troubled by worries that he will find her out. She feels like an
imposter. She is haunted by fears that he doesn’t love the ‘real’ her –
and usually she is right. (‘She wanted to marry a man with whom she
could be as bitchy as she really is.’)

This is just about when she discovers that love and marriage mean a
different thing for a male than they do for her: though men in general
believe women in general to be inferior, every man has reserved a
special place in his mind for the one woman he will elevate above the
rest by virtue of association with himself. Until now the woman, out in
the cold, begged for his approval, dying to clamber onto this clean
well-lighted place. But once there, she realizes that she was elevated
above other women not in recognition of her real value, but only because
she matched nicely his store-bought pedestal. Probably he doesn’t even
know who she is (if indeed by this time she herself knows). He has let
her in not because he genuinely loved her, but only because she played
so well into his preconceived fantasies. Though she knew his love to be
false, since she herself engineered it, she can’t help feeling contempt
for him. But she is afraid, at first, to reveal her true self, for then
perhaps even that false love would go. And finally she understands that
for him, too, marriage had all kinds of motivations that had nothing to
do with love. She was merely the one closest to his fantasy image: she
has been named Most Versatile Actress for the multi-role of Alter Ego,
Mother of My Children, Housekeeper, Cook, Companion, in his play. She
has been bought to fill an empty space in his life; but her life is
nothing.

So she has not saved herself from being like other women. She is lifted
out of that class only because she now is an appendage of a member of
the master class; and he cannot associate with her unless he raises her
status. But she has not been freed, she has been promoted to
‘housenigger’, she has been elevated only to be used in a different way.
She feels cheated. She has gotten not love and recognition, but
possessorship and control. This is when she is transformed from Blushing
Bride to Bitch, a change that, no matter how universal and predictable,
still leaves the individual husband perplexed. (‘You’re not the girl I
married.’)

\*   \*   \*

The situation of women has not changed significantly from what it ever
was. For the past fifty years women have been in a double bind about
love: under the guise of a ‘sexual revolution’, presumed to have
occurred (‘Oh, c’mon Baby, where have you been? Haven’t you heard of the
sexual revolution?’), women have been persuaded to shed their armour.
The modern woman is in horror of being thought a bitch, where her
grandmother expected that to happen as the natural course of things.
Men, too, in her grandmother’s time, expected that any self-respecting
woman would keep them waiting, would play all the right games without
shame: a woman who did not guard her own interests in this way was not
respected. It was out in the open.

But the rhetoric of the sexual revolution, if it brought no improvements
for women, proved to have great value for men. By convincing women that
the usual female games and demands were despicable, unfair, prudish,
old-fashioned, puritanical, and self-destructive, a new reservoir of
available females was created to expand the tight supply of goods
available for traditional sexual exploitation, disarming women of even
the little protection they had so painfully acquired. Women today dare
not make the old demands for fear of having a whole new vocabulary,
designed just for this purpose, hurled at them: ‘fucked up’,
‘ballbreaker’, ‘cockteaser’, ‘a real drag’, ‘a bad trip’ – to be a
‘groovy chick’ is the ideal.

Even now many women know what’s up and avoid the trap, preferring to be
called names rather than be cheated out of the little they can hope for
from men (for it is still true that even the hippest want an ‘old lady’
who is relatively unused). But more and more women are sucked, only to
find out too late, and bitterly, that the traditional female games had a
point; they are shocked to catch themselves at thirty complaining in a
vocabulary dangerously close to the old
I’ve-been-used-men-are-wolves-they’re-all-bastards variety. Eventually
they are forced to acknowledge the old-wives’ truth: a fair and generous
woman is (at best) respected, but seldom loved. Here is a description,
still valid today, of the ‘emancipated’ woman – in this case a Greenwich
Village artist of the thirties – from Mosquitoes, an early Faulkner
novel:

She had always had trouble with her men … Sooner or later they always
ran out on her … Men she recognized as having potentialities all passed
through a violent but temporary period of interest which ceased as
abruptly as it began, without leaving even the lingering threads of
mutually remembered incidence, like those brief thunderstorms of August
that threaten and dissolve for no apparent reason without producing any
rain.

At times she speculated with almost masculine detachment on the reason
for this. She always tried to keep their relationships on the plane
which the men themselves seemed to prefer – certainly no woman would,
and few women could, demand less of their men than she did. She never
made arbitrary demands on their time, never caused them to wait for her
nor to see her home at inconvenient hours, never made them fetch and
carry for her; she fed them and flattered herself that she was a good
listener. And yet – She thought of the women she knew; how all of them
had at least one obviously entranced male; she thought of the women she
had observed; how they seemed to acquire a man at will, and if he failed
to stay acquired, how readily they replaced him.

Women of high ideals who believed emancipation possible, women who tried
desperately to rid themselves of feminine ‘hangups’, to cultivate what
they believed to be the greater directness, honesty, and generosity of
men, were badly fooled. They found that no one appreciated their
intelligent conversation, their high aspirations, their great sacrifices
to avoid developing the personalities of their mothers. For much as men
were glad to enjoy their wit, their style, their sex, and their
candlelight suppers, they always ended up marrying the Bitch, and then,
to top it all off, came back to complain of what a horror she was.
‘Emancipated’ women found out that the honesty, generosity, and
camaraderie of men was a lie: men were all too glad to use them and then
sell them out, in the name of true friendship. (‘I respect and like you
a great deal, but let’s be reasonable…’ And then there are the men who
take her out to discuss Simone de Beauvoir, leaving their wives at home
with the diapers.) ‘Emancipated’ women found out that men were far from
‘good guys’ to be emulated; they found out that by imitating male sexual
patterns (the roving eye, the search for the ideal, the emphasis on
physical attraction, etc.), they were not only not achieving liberation,
they were falling into something much worse than what they had given up.
They were imitating. And they had inoculated themselves with a sickness
that had not even sprung from their own psyches. They found that their
new ‘cool’ was shallow and meaningless, that their emotions were drying
up behind it that, they were ageing and becoming decadent: they feared
they were losing their ability to love. They had gained nothing by
imitating men: shallowness and callowness, and they were not so good at
it either, because somewhere inside it still went against the grain.

Thus women who had decided not to marry because they were wise enough to
look around and see where it led found that it was marry or nothing. Men
gave their commitment only for a price: share (shoulder) his life, stand
on his pedestal, become his appendage, or else. Or else – be consigned
forever to that limbo of ‘chicks’ who mean nothing, certainly not what
mother meant. Be the ‘other woman’ for the rest of one’s life, used to
provoke his wife, prove his virility and/or his independence, discussed
by his friends as his latest ‘interesting’ conquest. (For even if she
had given up those terms and what they stood for, no male had.) Yes,
love means an entirely different thing to men than to women: it means
ownership and control; it means jealousy, where he never exhibited it
before – when she might have wanted him to (who cares if she is broke or
raped until she officially belongs to him: then he is a raging dynamo, a
veritable cyclone, because his property, his ego extension have been
threatened); it means a growing lack of interest, coupled with a roving
eye. Who needs it?

Sadly, women do. Here are Reik’s patients once more: ‘She sometimes has
delusions of not being persecuted by men anymore. At those times of her
nonpersecution mania she is very depressed.’ And: ‘All men are selfish,
brutal and inconsiderate – and I wish I could find one.’ We have seen
that a woman needs love, first, for its natural enriching function, and
second, for social and economic reasons which have nothing to do with
love, To deny her need is to put herself in an extra-vulnerable spot
socially and economically, as well as to destroy her emotional
equilibrium, which, unlike most men’s, is basically healthy. Are men
worth that? Decidedly no. Most women feel that to do such tailspins for
a man would be to add insult to injury. They go on as before, making the
best of a bad situation. If it gets too bad, they head for a (usually
male) shrink:

A young woman patient was once asked during a psychoanalytic
consultation whether she preferred to see a man or woman psychoanalyst.
Without the slightest hesitation she said, ‘A woman psychoanalyst
because I am too eager for the approval of a man.’

7 The Culture of Romance

So far we have not distinguished ‘romance’ from love. For there are no
two kinds of love, one healthy (dull) and one not (painful) (‘My dear,
what you need is a mature love relationship. Get over this romantic
nonsense’), but only less-than-love or daily agony. When love takes
place in a power context, everyone’s ‘love life’ must be affected.
Because power and love don’t make it together.

So when we talk about romantic love we mean love corrupted by its power
context – the sex class system – into a diseased form of love that then
in turn reinforces this sex class system. We have seen that the
psychological dependence of women upon men is created by continuing real
economic and social oppression. However, in the modern world the
economic and social bases of the oppression are no longer alone enough
to maintain it. So the apparatus of romanticism is hauled in. (Looks
like we’ll have to help her out. Boys!)

Romanticism develops in proportion to the liberation of women from their
biology. As civilization advances and the biological bases of sex class
crumble, male supremacy must shore itself up with artificial
institutions, or exaggerations of previous institutions, e.g., where
previously the family had a loose, permeable form, it now tightens and
rigidifies into the patriarchal nuclear family. Or, where formerly women
had been held openly in contempt, now they are elevated to states of
mock worship.[1](#part0017.html#chapter7-1) Romanticism is a cultural
tool of male power to keep women from knowing their conditions. It is
especially needed – and therefore strongest – in Western countries with
the highest rate of industrialization. Today, with technology enabling
women to break out of their roles for good – it was a near miss in the
early twentieth century – romanticism is at an all-time high.

How does romanticism work as a cultural tool to reinforce sex class? Let
us examine its components, refined over centuries, and the modern
methods of its diffusion – cultural techniques so sophisticated and
penetrating that even men are damaged by them.

(1) Eroticism. A prime component of romanticism is eroticism. All animal
needs (the affection of a kitten that has never seen heat) for love and
warmth are channelled into genital sex: people must never touch others
of the same sex, and may touch those of the opposite sex only when
preparing for a genital sexual encounter (‘a pass’). Isolation from
others makes people starved for physical affection; and if the only kind
they can get is genital sex, that’s soon what they crave. In this state
of hypersensitivity the least sensual stimulus has an exaggerated
effect, enough to inspire everything from schools of master painting to
Rock V Roll. Thus eroticism is the concentration of sexuality – often
into highly-charged objects (‘Chantilly Lace’) – signifying the
displacement of other social/affection needs on to genital sex. To be
plain old needy-for-affection makes one a ‘drip’, to need a kiss is
embarrassing, unless it is an erotic kiss; only ‘sex’ is OK, in fact it
proves one’s mettle. Virility and sexual performance become confused
with social worth.[2](#part0017.html#chapter7-2)

Constant erotic stimulation of male sexuality coupled with its forbidden
release through most normal channels are designed to encourage men to
look at women as only things whose resistance to entrance must be
overcome. For notice that this eroticism operates in only one direction.
Women are the only ‘love’ objects in our society, so much so that women
regard themselves as erotic.[3](#part0017.html#chapter7-3) This
functions to preserve direct sex pleasure for the male, reinforcing
female dependence: women can be fulfilled sexually only by vicarious
identification with the man who enjoys them. Thus eroticism preserves
the sex class system.

The only exception to this concentration of all emotional needs into
erotic relationships is the (sometimes) affection within the family. But
here, too, unless they are his children, a man can no more express
affection for children than he can for women. Thus his affection for the
young is also a trap to saddle him into the marriage structure,
reinforcing the patriarchal system.

(2) The sex privatization of women. Eroticism is only the topmost layer
of the romanticism that reinforces female inferiority. As with any lower
class, group awareness must be deadened to keep them from rebelling. In
this case, because the distinguishing characteristic of women’s
exploitation as a class is sexual, a special means must be found to make
them unaware that they are considered all alike sexually (‘cunts’).
Perhaps when a man marries he chooses from this undistinguishable lot
with care, for as we have seen, he holds a special high place in his
mental reserve for ‘The One’, by virtue of her close association with
himself; but in general, he can’t tell the difference between chicks
(blondes, brunettes, redheads).[4](#part0017.html#chapter7-4) And he
likes it that way. (‘A wiggle in your walk, a giggle in your talk,
THAT’S WHAT I LIKE!’) When a man believes all women are alike, but wants
to keep women from guessing, what does he do? He keeps his beliefs to
himself, and pretends, to allay her suspicions, that what she has in
common with other women is precisely what makes her different. Thus her
sexuality eventually becomes synonymous with her individuality. The sex
privatization of women is the process whereby women are blinded to their
generality as a class which renders them invisible as individuals to the
male eye. Is not that strange Mrs Lady next to the President in his
entourage reminiscent of the discreet black servant at White House
functions?

The process is insidious: When a man exclaims, ‘I love Blondes!’ all the
secretaries in the vicinity sit up; they take it personally because they
have been sex-privatized. The blonde one feels personally complimented
because she has come to measure her worth through the physical
attributes that differentiate her from other women. She no longer
recalls that any physical attribute you could name is shared by many
others, that these are accidental attributes not of her own creation,
that her sexuality is shared by half of humanity. But in an authentic
recognition of her individuality, her blondeness would be loved, but in
a different way: she would be loved first as an irreplaceable totality,
and then her blondeness would be loved as one of the characteristics of
that totality.

The apparatus of sex privatization is so sophisticated that it may take
years to detect – if detectable at all. It explains many puzzling traits
of female psychology that take such form as:

Women who are personally complimented by compliments to their sex, i.e.,
‘Hats off to the Little Woman!’

Women who are not insulted when addressed regularly and impersonally as
Dear, Honey, Sweetie, Sugar, Kitten, Darling, Angel, Queen, Princess,
Doll, Woman.

Women who are secretly flattered to have their asses pinched in Rome.
(Much wiser to count the number of times other girls’ asses are
pinched!)

The joys of ‘prickteasing’ (generalized male horniness taken as a sign
of personal value and desirability).

The ‘clotheshorse’ phenomenon. (Women, denied legitimate outlets for
expression of their individuality, ‘express’ themselves physically, as
in ‘I want to see something “different”.’)

These are only some of the reactions to the sex privatization process,
the confusion of one’s sexuality with one’s individuality. The process
is so effective that most women have come to believe seriously that the
world needs their particular sexual contributions to go on. (‘She thinks
her pussy is made of gold.’) But the love songs would still be written
without them.

Women may be duped, but men are quite conscious of this as a valuable
manipulative technique. That is why they go to great pains to avoid
talking about women in front of them (‘not in front of a lady’) – it
would give their game away. To overhear a bull session is traumatic to a
woman: so all this time she has been considered only ‘ass’, ‘meat’,
‘twat’, or ‘stuff’, to be gotten a ‘piece of’, ‘that bitch’, or ‘this
broad’ to be tricked out of money or sex or love! To understand finally
that she is no better than other women but completely indistinguishable
comes not just as a blow but as a total annihilation. But perhaps the
time that women more often have to confront their own sex privatization
is in a lover’s quarrel, when the truth spills out: then a man might get
careless and admit that the only thing he ever really liked her for was
her bust (‘Built like a brick shit-house’) or legs anyway (‘Hey,
Legs!’), and he can find that somewhere else if he has to.

Thus sex privatization stereotypes women: it encourages men to see women
as ‘dolls’ differentiated only by superficial attributes – not of the
same species as themselves – and it blinds women to their sexploitation
as a class, keeping them from uniting against it, thus effectively
segregating the two classes. A side-effect is the converse: if women are
differentiated only by superficial physical attributes, men appear more
individual and irreplaceable than they really are.

Women, because social recognition is granted only for a false
individuality, are kept from developing the tough individuality that
would enable breaking through such a ruse. If one’s existence in its
generality is the only thing acknowledged, why go to the trouble to
develop real character? It is much less hassle to ‘light up the room
with a smile’ – until that day when the ‘chick’ graduates to ‘old bag’,
to find that her smile is no longer ‘inimitable’.

(3) The beauty ideal. Every society has promoted a certain ideal of
beauty over all others. What that ideal is is unimportant, for any ideal
leaves the majority out; ideals, by definition, are modelled on rare
qualities. For example, in America, the present fashion vogue of French
models, or the erotic ideal Voluptuous Blonde are modelled on qualities
rare indeed: few Americans are of French birth, most don’t look French
and never will (and besides they eat too much); voluptuous brunettes can
bleach their hair (as did Marilyn Monroe, the sex queen herself), but
blondes can’t develop curves at will – and most of them, being
Anglo-Saxon, simply aren’t built like that. If and when, by artificial
methods, the majority can squeeze into the ideal, the ideal changes. If
it were attainable, what good would it be?

For the exclusivity of the beauty ideal serves a clear political
function. Someone – most women – will be left out. And left scrambling,
because as we have seen, women have been allowed to achieve
individuality only through their appearance – looks being defined as
‘good’ not out of love for the bearer, but because of her more or less
successful approximation to an external standard. This image, defined by
men (and currently by homosexual men, often misogynists of the worst
order), becomes the ideal. What happens? Women everywhere rush to
squeeze into the glass slipper, forcing and mutilating their bodies with
diets and beauty programmes, clothes and makeup, anything to become the
punk prince’s dream girl. But they have no choice. If they don’t the
penalties are enormous: their social legitimacy is at stake.

Thus women become more and more look-alike. But at the same time they
are expected to express their individuality through their physical
appearance. Thus they are kept coming and going, at one and the same
time trying to express their similarity and their uniqueness. The
demands of Sex Privatization contradict the demands of the Beauty Ideal,
causing the severe feminine neurosis about personal appearance.

But this conflict itself has an important political function. When women
begin to look more and more alike, distinguished only by the degree to
which they differ from a paper ideal, they can be more easily
stereotyped as a class: they look alike, they think alike, and even
worse, they are so stupid they believe they are not alike.

\*   \*   \*

These are some of the major components of the cultural apparatus,
romanticism, which, with the weakening of ‘natural’ limitations on
women, keep sex oppression going strong. The political use of
romanticism over the centuries became increasingly complex. Operating
subtly or blatantly, on every cultural level, romanticism is now – in
this time of greatest threat to the male power role – amplified by new
techniques of communication so all-pervasive that men get entangled in
their own line. How does this amplification work?

With the cultural portrayal of the smallest details of existence (e.g.,
deodorizing one’s underarms), the distance between one’s experience and
one’s perceptions of it becomes enlarged by a vast interpretive network;
if our direct experience contradicts its interpretation by this
ubiquitous cultural network, the experience must be denied. This
process, of course, does not apply only to women. The pervasion of image
has so deeply altered our very relationships to ourselves that even men
have become objects – if never erotic objects. Images become extensions
of oneself; it gets hard to distinguish the real person from his latest
image, if indeed the Person Underneath hasn’t evaporated altogether.
Arnie, the kid who sat in back of you in the sixth grade, picking his
nose and cracking jokes, the one who had a crook in his left shoulder,
is lost under successive layers of adopted images: the High School
Comedian, the Campus Rebel, James Bond, the Salem Springtime Lover, and
so on, each image hitting new highs of sophistication until the person
himself doesn’t know who he is. Moreover, he deals with others through
this image-extension (Boy-Image meets Girl-Image and consummates
Image-Romance). Even if a woman could get beneath this intricate image
façade – and it would take months, even years, of a painful, almost
therapeutic relationship – she would be met not with gratitude that she
had (painfully) loved the man for his real self, but with shocked
repulsion and terror that she had found him out. What he wants instead
is the Pepsi-Cola Girl, to smile pleasantly to his Johnny Walker Red in
front of a ski-lodge fire.

But, while this reification affects both men and women alike, in the
case of women it is profoundly complicated by the forms of sexploitation
I have described. Woman is not only an Image, she is the Image of Sex
Appeal. The sterotyping of women expands: now there is no longer the
excuse of ignorance. Every woman is constantly and explicitly informed
on how to ‘improve’ what nature gave her, where to buy the products to
do it with, and how to count the calories she should never have eaten –
indeed, the ‘ugly’ woman is now so nearly extinct even she is fast
becoming ‘exotic’. The competition becomes frantic, because everyone is
now plugged into the same circuit. The current beauty ideal becomes
all-pervasive (‘Blondes havemorefun…’).

And eroticism becomes erotomania. Stimulated to the limit, it has
reached an epidemic level unequalled in history. From every magazine
cover, film screen, TV tube, subway sign, jump breasts, legs, shoulders,
thighs. Men walk about in a state of constant sexual excitement. Even
with the best of intentions, it is difficult to focus on anything else.
This bombardment of the senses, in turn, escalates sexual provocation
still further: ordinary means of arousal have lost all effect. Clothing
becomes more provocative: hemlines climb, bras are shed. See-through
materials become ordinary. But in all this barrage of erotic stimuli,
men themselves are seldom portrayed as erotic objects. Women’s
eroticism, as well as men’s, becomes increasingly directed towards
women.

One of the internal contradictions of this highly effective propaganda
system is to expose to men as well as women the stereotyping process
women undergo. Though the idea was to better acquaint women with their
feminine role, men who turn on the TV are also treated to the latest in
tummy-control, false eyelashes, and floor waxes (Does she … or doesn’t
she?). Such a crosscurrent of sexual tease and exposé would be enough to
make any man hate women, if he didn’t already.

Thus the extension of romanticism through modern media enormously
magnified its effects. If before culture maintained male supremacy
through Eroticism, Sex Privatization, and the Beauty Ideal, these
cultural processes are now almost too effectively carried out: the media
are guilty of ‘overkill’. The regeneration of the women’s movement at
this moment in history may be due to a backfiring, an internal
contradiction of our modern cultural indoctrination system. For in its
amplification of sex indoctrination, the media have unconsciously
exposed the degradation of ‘femininity’.

In conclusion, I want to add a note about the special difficulties of
attacking the sex class system through its means of cultural
indoctrination. Sex objects are beautiful. An attack on them can be
confused with an attack on beauty itself. Feminists need not get so
pious in their efforts that they feel they must flatly deny the beauty
of the face on the cover of Vogue. For this is not the point. The real
question is: is the face beautiful in a human way – does it allow for
growth and flux and decay, does it express negative as well as positive
emotions, does it fall apart without artificial props – or does it
falsely imitate the very different beauty of an inanimate object, like
wood trying to be metal?

To attack eroticism creates similar problems. Eroticism is exciting. No
one wants to get rid of it. Life would be a drab and routine affair
without at least that spark. That’s just the point. Why has all joy and
excitement been concentrated, driven into one narrow, difficult-to-find
alley of human experience, and all the rest laid waste? When we demand
the elimination of eroticism, we mean not the elimination of sexual joy
and excitement but its rediffusion over – there’s plenty to go around,
it increases with use – the spectrum of our lives.

8 (Male) Culture

Representation of the world, like the world itself, is the work of men;
they describe it from their own point of view, which they confuse with
absolute truth.

Simone de Beauvoir

 

The relation of women to culture has been indirect. We have discussed
how the present psychical organization of the two sexes dictates that
most women spend their emotional energy on men, whereas men ‘sublimate’
theirs into work. In this way women’s love becomes raw fuel for the
cultural machine. (Not to mention the Great Ideas born rather more
directly from early-morning boudoir discussions.)

In addition to providing its emotional support, women had another
important indirect relation to culture: they inspired it. The Muse is
female. Men of culture were emotionally warped by the sublimation
process; they converted life to art, thus could not live it. But women,
and those men who were excluded from culture, remained in direct contact
with their experience – fit subject matter.

That women were intrinsic in the very content of culture is borne out by
an example from the history of art: men are erotically stimulated by the
opposite sex; painting was male; the nude became a female nude. Where
the art of the male nude reached high levels, either in the work of an
individual artist, e.g., Michelangelo, or in a whole artistic period,
such as that of classical Greece, men were homosexual.

The subject matter of art, when there is any, is today even more largely
inspired by women. Imagine the elimination of women characters from
popular films and novels, even from the work of ‘highbrow’ directors –
Antonioni, Bergman, or Godard; there wouldn’t be much left. For in the
last few centuries, particularly in popular culture – perhaps related to
the problematic position of women in society – women have been the main
subject of art. In fact, in scanning blurbs of even one month’s cultural
production, one might believe that women were all anyone ever thought
about.

But what about the women who have contributed directly to culture? There
aren’t many. And in those cases where individual women have participated
in male culture, they have had to do so on male terms. And it shows.
Because they have had to compete as men, in a male game – while still
being pressured to prove themselves in their old female roles, a role at
odds with their self-appointed ambitions – it is not surprising that
they are seldom as skilled as men at the game of culture.

And it is not just a question of being as competent, it is also a
question of being authentic. We have seen in the context of love how
modern women have imitated male psychology, confusing it with health,
and have thereby ended up even worse off than men themselves: they were
not even being true to homegrown sicknesses. And there are even more
complex layers to this question of authenticity: women have no means of
coming to an understanding of what their experience is, or even that it
is different from male experience. The tool for representing, for
objectifying one’s experience in order to deal with it, culture, is so
saturated with male bias that women almost never have a chance to see
themselves culturally through their own eyes. So that finally, signals
from their direct experience that conflict with the prevailing (male)
culture are denied and repressed.

Thus because cultural dicta are set by men, presenting only the male
view – and now in a super-barrage – women are kept from achieving an
authentic picture of their reality. Why do women, for example, get
aroused by a pornography of female bodies? In their ordinary experience
of female nudity, say in a gym locker room, the sight of other nude
females might be interesting (though probably only in so far as they
rate by male sexual standards), but not directly erotic. Cultural
distortion of sexuality explains also how female sexuality gets twisted
into narcissism: women make love to themselves vicariously through the
man, rather than directly making love to him. At times this cultural
barrage of man/subject, woman/object desensitizes women to male forms to
such a degree that they are orgasmically
affected.[1](#part0017.html#chapter8-1)

There are other examples of the distorting effects on female vision of
an exclusively male culture. Let us go back to the history of figurative
painting once again: we have seen how in the tradition of the nude, male
heterosexual inclinations came to emphasize the female rather than the
male as the more aesthetic and pleasing form. Such a predilection for
either one over the other, of course, is based on a sexuality which is
in itself artificial, culturally created. But at least one might then
expect the opposite bias to prevail in the view of women painters still
involved in the tradition of the nude. This is not the case. In any art
school in the country one sees classrooms full of girls working
diligently from the female model, accepting that the male model is
somehow less aesthetic, at best perhaps novel, and certainly never
questioning why the male model wears a jock strap when the female model
wouldn’t dream of appearing in so much as a G-string.

Again, looking at the work of well-known women painters associated with
the Impressionist School of the nineteenth century, Berthe Morisot and
Mary Cassatt, one wonders at their obsessive preoccupation with
traditionally female subject matter: women, children, female nudes,
interiors, etc. This is partially explained by political conditions of
that period: women painters were lucky to be allowed to paint anything
at all, let alone male models. And yet it is more than that. These
women, for all their superb draughtsmanship and compositional skill,
remained minor painters because they had ‘lifted’ a set of traditions
and a view of the world that was inauthentic for them. They worked
within the limits of what had been defined as female by a male
tradition: they saw women through male eyes, painted a male’s idea of
female. And they carried it to an extreme, for they were attempting to
outdo men at their own game; they had fallen for a (lovely) line. And
thus the falseness that corrupts their work, making it ‘feminine’, i.e.
sentimental, light.

It would take a denial of all cultural tradition for women to produce
even a true ‘female’ art. For a woman who participates in (male) culture
must achieve and be rated by standards of a tradition she had no part in
making – and certainly there is no room in that tradition for a female
view, even if she could discover what it was. In those cases where a
woman, tired of losing at a male game, has attempted to participate in
culture in a female way, she has been put down and misunderstood, named
by the (male) cultural establishment ‘Lady Artist’, i.e. trivial,
inferior. And even where it must be (grudgingly) admitted she is ‘good’,
it is fashionable – a cheap way to indicate one’s own ‘seriousness’ and
refinement of taste – to insinuate that she is good but irrelevant.

Perhaps it is true that a presentation of only the female side of things
– which tends to be one long protest and complaint rather than the
portrayal of a full and substantive existence – is limited. But an
equally relevant question, one much less frequently asked, is: Is it any
more limited than the prevailing male view of things, which – when not
taken as absolute truth – is at least seen as ‘serious’, relevant, and
important? Is Mary McCarthy in The Group really so much worse a writer
than Norman Mailer in The American Dream? Or is she perhaps describing a
reality that men, the controllers and critics of the Cultural
Establishment, can’t tune in on?

That men and women are tuned to a different cultural wavelength, that in
fact there exists a wholly different reality for men and women, is
apparent in our crudest cultural form – comic books. From my own
experience: When I was little my brother had literally a room-size
collection of comic books. But though I was a greedy reader, this vast
comic book library interested me not in the least. My literary taste was
completely different from his. He preferred ‘heavies’ like War Comics
(Aak-Aak-Aak!) and Superman; and for relief, ‘funnies’ like Bugs Bunny,
Tweetie and Sylvester, Tom and Jerry, and all the stuttering pigs who
took forever to get a rather obvious message out. Though these ‘funnies’
grated on my more aesthetic sensibilities, I would read them in a pinch.
But had I had an allowance as big, and as little parental supervision, I
might have indulged in a ‘heavy’ library of Love Comics (LARGE TEAR. On
Tod, don’t tell Sue about us, she’d die), an occasional True
Confessions, and for ‘light’ relief, Archie and Veronica. Or the
occasional more imaginative variations of boys’ comics, like Plasticman
(Superman with a rubber arm that could reach around blocks) or Uncle
Scrooge McDuck editions of Donald Duck; I loved the selfish extravagance
of his bathing in money. (Many women – deprived of Self – have confessed
the same girlhood passion.) Even more likely, I would not have invested
in comic books at all. Fairy tales, much less realistic, were a better
trip.

My brother thought girls’ taste was ‘drippy’, and I thought he was a
crude slob. Who was right? We both were; but he won (he owned the
library).

This division continues to operate at higher cultural levels. I had to
force myself to read Mailer, Heller, Donleavy, and others for the same
reasons that I couldn’t stand my brother’s library: to me they seemed
only complex versions of (respectively) Superman, Aak-Aak-Aak, and the
Adventures of Bugs Bunny. But though the ‘male’ library continued to
repel me, in the process of developing ‘good taste’ (male taste), I also
lost my love for the ‘female’ library, indeed I developed an abhorrence;
and I would – I’m ashamed to admit it – far sooner have been caught dead
with Hemingway than with Virginia Woolf in my hands.

In order to illustrate this cultural dichotomy in more objective terms,
we don’t need to attack the more obvious paper tigers (all senses
implied) who consciously present a ‘male’ reality – viz. Hemingway,
Jones, Mailer, Farrell, Algren, and the rest. The new Virility School in
twentieth-century literature is in itself a direct response, indeed a
male cultural backlash, to the growing threat to male supremacy –
Virility, Inc., a bunch of culturally deprived ‘tough guys’, punching
away to save their manhood. And though they get more credit, these
artists write about the ‘male’ experience no more perceptively than
Doris Lessing, Sylvia Plath, Anaïs Nin have written about the female
experience. In fact they are guilty of a mystification of their
experience that makes their writing phony.

Instead, we will examine a bias more insidious (because less obvious) in
male writers who honestly attempt to describe the whole spectrum of
male/female experience – Bellow, Malamud, Updike, Roth, etc. – but who
fail because, often without realizing it, they have described this whole
from a limited (male) angle.

Let’s look briefly at a story by Herbert Gold, not a ‘male’ writer in
either style or subject matter. He writes about what concerns women,
that is, relationships, preferably male/female; marriages; divorces;
affairs. In this story, ‘What’s Become of Your Creature?’, he describes
the affair of a harassed young college professor with his blonde,
Bohemianish student.

The picture we get of Lenka Kuwaila from the male character’s view is
only sensual, if sensitive on those terms. The story begins:

A girl. A gay, pretty, and sullen girl, with full marks for both
sweetness and cruelty. When he looked in her desk for cigarettes, there
was a silken pile of panties folded like flowers, dizzying him with the
joy of springtime. When she put on a pair of them, suddenly filling out
the tiny pair of petals of cloth in two paired buds, it was as if the
sun had forced a flower into delicate Easter bloom. Oh, he needed her,
loved her, and so for honour to them both, let us tell the truth, as
straight as truth comes.

But the truth that we get ‘straight as truth comes’ is only his view of
the truth:

There is a time in the life of every man when he can do anything. It was
this time in the life of Frank Curtiss. Despair with his wife had given
up to deep gratification with a beautiful girl; he even did better at
home; matters cooled and calmed; his work went well; he hardly needed
sleep and did not suffer his usual rose fever during the spring he knew
Lenka. No sniffles, no pink eyes. Expanded breathing, sharp sight. Of
the occasional headache of fatigue and excess he was cured by the touch
of her hand, her welcome when he came smiling, showing teeth, through
her window.

But her truth must have been an altogether different one, a truth of
which there is no trace in the story until one day (out of the blue)
Lenka writes his wife a long letter. The failing marriage that had been
improving steadily since Frank began his affair with Lenka is destroyed
for good:

Lenka left New York without seeing him after his anguished phone call to
her:’ Why? Why? Why did you have to do it that way, Lenka? Can’t you see
how it destroys everything between us, even the past?’

‘I don’t care about memories. What’s over means nothing. Over. You
didn’t want to do more than crawl through my window a couple of times a
week –’

‘But to write to her like that – what meant – how –’

‘You cared more about a cold bitch than you cared for me. Just because
you had a child.’

‘Why, why?’

She hung up on him.

He stood shrugging at the telephone. Women were hanging up on him all
over the world. He was disconnected.

Feeling betrayed and tricked, Frank bewilderedly nurses his wounds;
throughout the rest of the story one feels his puzzlement: he does not
understand what led her to do it, he does not ‘understand women’.
Finally he lets it rest by granting her ‘full marks for cruelty’ as well
as sweetness.

But Lenka’s ‘cruelty’ is the direct result of his inability to see her
as more than ‘a girl’ (gay, pretty, or sullen), as, instead, perhaps, a
complex human being with a self-interest not identical with his.
However, due to Gold’s authentic recounting of incident and dialogue, a
sensitive (probably female) reader might read between the lines: Lenka
was the one betrayed. Here is Frank a few years later in Manhattan:

He found a girl to join him in biting into an apple, sucking the sweet
juice of it at dawn, finally kissing in good friendship and turning on
their sides to sleep … He felt free … He threw away his bottle of
aspirins. His married vision of himself as a heavy, shaggy, weary
buffalo, head low and muzzle hurt, gave way to another image – he was
lean, his posture was good, he was an agile bucko. When his former wife
remarried, his last vestige of guilt disappeared. Free, free. He played
badminton twice a week with a French girl who pronounced it
‘Badd-ming-tonn’.

A gay bachelor now, Frank impulsively calls Lenka up one day:

But after he told her how long he had been in New York, she said that
she was not interested in seeing him.

‘I held a grudge, you can understand that,’ he said. ‘I still think you
were very wrong, but I’m grateful anyway. It worked out for the best.’

‘And it’s over,’ she said.

Later he runs into her to find her wasted on junk, whoring for a black
musician:

She may have invented a foolish lie \[in order to invite him up to her
room\], but she recognized the glare of contempt on his face, and in her
life of now a quarter of a century, she had learned only one way to
answer the judgement of men. She slid against him, on her face a mixture
of coyness and dread, a flirtatious half-smile, a slinking catlike
practiced leaning against him, and her eyes filled with tears as she
shut them, tears balanced on her wetted lashes, slipping down her
cheeks. ‘Frank,’ she said haltingly. ‘I stopped remembering for a long
time, I don’t know, things were difficult, I thought you were too
angry … But I’ve been remembering … That’s why … Forgive…’

He put his arms around her, held her to him, but with more confusion
than either amorousness or tenderness …

Then he thought of the letters she had just now lied about, and
suddenly, as she turned her head up wanting to be kissed, his most vivid
fantasy was this one: She was unclean. His uncurbed dread ran towards a
muddle – deceit, illness, secret pity, slime, and retribution. Not
knowing what he feared, he thought only: filth, cunning, running filth,
blotches, sores. Because he could not bear her sorrows, he thought:
Deceit and cunning and disease!

He pulled away before their mouths touched; her nails clawed along his
arm, shredding skin; he fled, hearing her sobs at the open door as he
careened down the infected stairs and into the free air of the street.

Curtain: Frank caresses his newly pregnant wife, wondering
whatever-happened-to-Lenka.

This is not a male story in subject, and it is not a ‘male’ story in
style – there is enough description of emotion in it to shame any male
writer. But it is still a ‘male’ story by virtue of its peculiar
limitation of vision: it does not understand women. Lenka’s sensuality
and loveliness is as much of her as Frank is able to comprehend. Her
motives for writing to his wife, her refusal to see him, her attempted
seduction, described with such guilty loathing – these Frank can’t deal
with, just as in real life men can’t deal with them (‘Because he could
not bear her sorrows, he thought: Deceit and cunning and disease!’). To
know a woman beyond the level of her delightfulness is too much for him.
Women are judged only in terms of himself, and what they can bring to
him, whether beauty and joy or pain and sorrow. Whichever it is, he does
not question it, not understanding that his own behaviour had been or
could be a determining influence.

One can imagine an entirely different story of the same affair, even
using the same information and dialogue, only this time written by
Lenka. Her behaviour then might appear not irrational, but entirely
understandable; instead, the male character would come out shallow.
Perhaps, indeed, we might end up with more than just an opposite sexual
bias. We might get as much as three quarters of the picture (i.e. Frank
shallow because he is unable to live up to his emotions), since women in
general, through long oppression, have learned to be hipper to male
psychology than vice versa. But this has seldom happened in literature,
for most Lenkas are sufficiently destroyed by their use and abuse never
to write their own stories coherently.

Thus the difference between the ‘male’ approach to art and the ‘female’,
is not, as some like to think, simply a difference of ‘style’ in
treating the same subject matter (personal, subjective, emotional,
descriptive vs. vigorous, spare, hardhitting, cool, objective) but the
very subject matter itself. The sex role system divides human
experience; men and women live in these different halves of reality; and
culture reflects this.

Only a few artists have overcome this division in their work. And one
wonders whether homosexuals are correct in their claim. But if not
through physical expression, then in some other way the greatest artists
became mentally androgynous. In the twentieth century, for example,
writers of the stature of Proust, Joyce, Kafka did it either by
physically identifying with the female (Proust), by imaginarily crossing
the line at will (Joyce), or by retreating to an imaginary world rarely
affected by the dichotomy (Kafka). But not only do most artists not
overcome, they are not even aware of the existence of a cultural
limitation based on sex – so much is the male reality accepted by both
male and female as Reality.

And what about women artists? We have seen that it has only been in the
last several centuries that women have been permitted to participate –
and then only on an individual basis, and on male terms – in the making
of culture. And even so their vision had become inauthentic: they were
denied the use of the cultural mirror.

And there are many negative reasons that women have entered art:
affluence always creates female dilettantism, e.g., the Victorian ‘young
lady’ with her accomplishments, or the arts of the Japanese geisha –
for, in addition to serving as a symbol of male luxury, women’s
increasing idleness under advancing industrialism presents a practical
problem: female discontent has to be eased to keep it from igniting. Or
women may be entering art as a refuge. Women today are still excluded
from the vital power centres of human activity; and art is one of the
last self-determining occupations left – often done in solitude. But in
this sense women are like a petty bourgeoisie trying to open up shop in
the age of corporate capitalism.

For the higher percentages of women in art lately may tell us more about
the state of art than about the state of women. Are we to feel cheered
that women have taken over in a capacity soon to be automated out? (Like
95 Percent Black at the Post Office, this is no sign of integration; on
the contrary, undesirables are being shoved into the least desirable
positions – Here, now get in and keep your mouth shut!) That art is no
longer a vital centre that attracts the best men of our generation may
also be a product of the male/female division, as I shall attempt to
show in the next chapter. But the animation of women and homosexuals in
the arts today may signify only the scurrying of rats near a dying
body.[2](#part0017.html#chapter8-2)

But if it has not yet created great women artists, women’s new literacy
has certainly created a female audience. Just as male audiences have
always demanded, and received, male art to reinforce their particular
view of reality, so a female audience demands a ‘female’ art to
reinforce the female reality. Thus the birth of the crude feminine novel
in the nineteenth century, leading to the love story of our own day, so
ever-present in popular culture (‘soap opera’); the women’s magazine
trade; Valley of the Dolls. These may be crude beginnings. Most of this
art is as yet primitive, clumsy, poor. But occasionally the female
reality is documented as clearly as the male reality has always been,
as, for example, in the work of Anne Sexton.

Eventually, out of this ferment – perhaps very soon – we may see the
emergence of an authentic female art. But the development of ‘female’
art is not to be viewed as reactionary, like its counterpart, the male
School of Virility. Rather it is progressive: an exploration of the
strictly female reality is a necessary step to correct the warp in a
sexually biased culture. It is only after we have integrated the dark
side of the moon into our world view that we can begin to talk seriously
of universal culture.

\*   \*   \*

Thus, all of culture has been to different degrees corrupted by sexual
polarization. We can summarize the various forms this corruption takes
in the following way:

(1) Male protest art. Art that self-consciously glorifies the male
reality (as opposed to taking for granted that it constitutes reality
itself) is only a recent development. I see it as a direct response to
the threat to male supremacy contained in the first blurring of rigid
sex roles. Such an art is reactionary by definition. To those men who
feel that this art best expresses what they are living and feeling, I
recommend a major overhaul of personality.

(2) The Male Angle. This art fails to achieve a comprehensive world view
because it does not recognize that male reality is not Reality, but only
one half of reality. Thus its portrayal of the opposite sex and its
behaviour (half of humanity) is false: the artist himself does not
understand female motives. Sometimes, as in the Herbert Gold story
quoted, the women characters can still come through if the author has
been faithful to at least the how – if not the why – of their behaviour.

A better-known example: the character of Catherine in Truffaut’s film
Jules and Jim is drawn from real life. There are many such vamps and
femmes fatales around, in reality nothing more than women who refuse to
accept their powerlessness. To keep an illusion of equality and to gain
an indirect power over men, Catherine must use ‘mystery’ (Sphinx),
unpredictability (jumping in the Seine), and wiles (sleeping around with
Mystery Men to keep Him dangling). When, in the end, as all women must,
she loses even this illegitimate power, her pride will not admit defeat:
she kills the man who had dared escape her, along with herself. But even
here, in an accurately drawn art, the male bias comes out. The director
goes along with the Mystery Woman mystique, does not probe to find out
what’s beneath it. Moreover, he doesn’t want to know: he is using it as
a source of eroticism. The picture we get of Catherine comes only
through a veil.

(3) (Individually cultivated) androgynous mentality. Even when the sex
limitations have been overcome by the individual artist, his art must
reveal a reality made ugly by its cleavage. A brief example, again from
film: though the Swedish directors have been notably free from personal
sex prejudice – the women they portray are human first and female second
– Liv Ullman’s portrayal of Noble Wife faithfully accompanying her
husband into his growing madness (Bergman’s Hour of the Wolf) or loving
him through his moral degeneration (Bergman’s Shame) or Lena Nyman’s
confused sensitivity in Sjoman’s I Am Curious (Yellow) are descriptions
not of a liberated sexuality but of a still-unresolved conflict between
the sexual and the human identity.

(4) Female art. This is a new development, not to be confused with
‘male’ art, even if, so far, it has been guilty of the same bias in
reverse. For this may signify the beginnings of a new consciousness,
rather than an ossification of the old. Within the next decade we may
see its growth into a powerful new art – perhaps arising in conjunction
with the feminist political movement or at its inspiration – that will,
for the first time, authentically grapple with the reality that women
live in.

We may also see a feminist Criticism, emphasizing, in order to correct,
the various forms of sex bias now corrupting art. However, in our third
category, that art which is guilty only of reflecting the human price of
a sex-divided reality, great care would have to be taken that criticism
be directed, not at the artists for their (accurate) portrayal of the
imperfect reality, but at the grotesqueness of that reality itself as
revealed by the art.

Only a feminist revolution can eliminate entirely the sex schism causing
these cultural distortions. Until then ‘pure art’ is a delusion – a
delusion responsible both for the inauthentic art women have produced
until now, as well as for the corruption of (male) culture at large. The
incorporation of the neglected half of human experience – the female
experience – into the body of culture, to create an all-encompassing
culture, is only the first step, a precondition; but the schism of
reality itself must be overthrown before there can be a true cultural
revolution.

9 Dialectics of Cultural History

So far we have treated ‘culture’ as synonymous with ‘arts and letters’
or at its broadest, ‘humanities’. This is a common enough confusion. But
it is startling in this context. For we discover that, while only
indirectly related to art, women have been entirely excluded from an
equally important half of culture: science. If at least with the arts we
could find enough material about the relationship of women to culture –
whether indirectly as influence, stimulus, or subject matter, or even
occasionally as direct participants – to fill at least a chapter, we can
hardly find a relationship of women to science worthy of discussion.
Perhaps in the broadest sense our statement that women are the emotional
force behind all (male) culture holds true – but we are stretching the
case to include modern science, where the empirical method specifically
demands the exclusion of the scientist’s personality from his research.
Satisfaction of his emotional needs through a woman in his off hours may
make him more stable, and thus steadier on the job, but this is
farfetched.

But if even the indirect relationship of women to science is debatable,
that there is no direct one is certainly not. One would have to search
to find even one woman who had contributed in a major way to scientific
culture. Moreover, the situation of women in science is not improving.
Even with the work of discovery shifted from the great comprehensive
minds of the past to small pragmatic university research teams, there
are remarkably few women scientists.[1](#part0017.html#chapter9-1)

This absence of women at all levels of the scientific disciplines is so
commonplace as to lead many (otherwise intelligent) people to attribute
it to some deficiency (logic?) in women themselves. Or to women’s own
predilections for the emotional and subjective over the practical and
rational. But the question cannot be so easily dismissed. It is true
that women in science are in foreign territory – but how has this
situation evolved? Why are there disciplines or branches of inquiry that
demand only a ‘male’ mind? Why would a woman, to qualify, have to
develop an alien psychology? When and why was the female excluded from
this type mind? How and why has science come to be defined as, and
restricted to, the ‘objective’?

I submit that not only were the arts and humanities corrupted by the sex
duality, but that modern science has been determined by it. And moreover
that culture reflects this polarity in its very organization. C. P. Snow
was the first to note what had been becoming increasingly obvious: a
deep fissure of culture – the liberal arts and the sciences had become
incomprehensible to each other. Again, though the universal man of the
Renaissance is widely lamented, specialization only increases. These are
some of the modern symptoms of a long cultural disease based on the sex
dualism. Let us examine the history of culture according to this
hypothesis – that there is an underlying dialectic of sex.

I

THE TWO MODES OF CULTURAL HISTORY

For our analysis we shall define culture in the following way: culture
is the attempt by man to realize the conceivable in the possible. Man’s
consciousness of himself within his environment distinguishes him from
the lower animals, and turns him into the only animal capable of
culture. This consciousness, his highest faculty, allows him to project
mentally states of being that do not exist at the moment. Able to
construct a past and future, he becomes a creature of time – a historian
and a prophet. More than this, he can imagine objects and states of
being that have never existed and may never exist in the real world – he
becomes a maker of art. Thus, for example, though the ancient Greeks did
not know how to fly, still they could imagine it. The myth of Icarus was
the formulation in fantasy of their conception of the state ‘flying’.

But man was not only able to project the conceivable into fantasy. He
also learned to impose it on reality: by accumulating knowledge,
learning experience, about that reality and how to handle it, he could
shape it to his liking. This accumulation of skills for controlling the
environment, technology, is another means to reaching the same end, the
realization of the conceivable in the possible. Thus, in our example,
if, in the B.C. era, man could fly on the magic carpet of myth or
fantasy, by the twentieth century, his technology, the accumulation of
his practical skills, had made it possible for him to fly in actuality –
he had invented the aeroplane. Another example: In the Biblical legend,
the Jews, an agricultural people stranded for forty years in the desert,
were provided by God with Manna, a miraculous substance that could be
transformed at will into food of any colour, texture, or taste; modern
food processing, especially with the ‘green revolution’, will probably
soon create a totally artificial food production, perhaps with this
chameleon attribute. Again, in ancient legend, man could imagine mixed
species, e.g., the centaur or the unicorn, or hybrid births, like the
birth of an animal from a human, or a virgin birth; the current
biological revolution, with its increasing knowledge of the reproductive
process, could now – if only the first crude stages – create these
‘monstrosities’ in reality. Brownies and elves, the Golem of medieval
Jewish lore, Mary Shelley’s monster in Frankenstein, were the
imaginative constructions that preceded by several centuries the
corresponding technological acumen. Many other fantastical constructions
– ghosts, mental telepathy, Methuselah’s age – remain to be realized by
modern science.

These two different responses, the idealistic and the scientific, do not
merely exist simultaneously: there is a dialogue between the two. The
imaginative construction precedes the technological though often it does
not develop until the technological know-how is ‘in the air’. For
example, the art of science fiction developed, in the main, only a
half-century in advance of, and now co-exists with, the scientific
revolution that is transforming it into a reality – for example (an
innocuous one), the moon flight. The phrases ‘way out’, ‘far out’,
‘spaced’, the observation ‘it’s like something out of science fiction’
are common language. In the aesthetic response, because it always
develops in advance, and is thus the product of another age, the same
realization may take on a sensational or unrealistic cast, e.g.,
Frankenstein’s monster, as opposed to, let us say, General Electric’s
CAM (Cybernetic Anthropomorphic Machines) Handyman. (An artist can never
know in advance just how his vision might be articulated in reality.)

Culture then is the sum of, and the dynamic between, the two modes
through which the mind attempts to transcend the limitations and
contingencies of reality. These two types of cultural responses entail
different methods to achieve the same end, the realization of the
conceivable in the possible. In the first,[2](#part0017.html#chapter9-2)
the individual denies the limitations of the given reality by escaping
from it altogether, to define, create, his own possible. In the
provinces of the imagination, objectified in some way – whether through
the development of a visual image within some artificial boundary, say
four square feet of canvas, through visual images projected through
verbal symbols (poetry), with sound ordered into a sequence (music), or
with verbal ideas ordered into a progression (theology, philosophy) – he
creates an ideal world governed by his own artificially imposed order
and harmony, a structure in which he consciously relates each part to
the whole, a static (and therefore ‘timeless’) construction. The degree
to which he abstracts his creation from reality is unimportant, for even
when he most appears to imitate, he has created an illusion governed by
its own – perhaps hidden – set of artificial laws. (Degas said that the
artist had to lie in order to tell the truth.) This search for the
ideal, realized by means of an artificial medium, we shall call the
Aesthetic Mode.

In the second type of cultural response the contingencies of reality are
overcome, not through the creation of an alternate reality, but through
the mastery of reality’s own workings: the laws of nature are exposed,
then turned against it, to shape it in accordance with man’s conception.
If there is a poison, man assumes there is an antidote; if there is a
disease, he searches for the cure: every fact of nature that is
understood can be used to alter it. But to achieve the ideal through
such a procedure takes much longer, and is infinitely more painful,
especially in the early stages of knowledge. For the vast and intricate
machine of nature must be entirely understood – and there are always
fresh and unexpected layers of complexity – before it can be thoroughly
controlled. Thus before any solution can be found to the deepest
contingencies of the human condition, e.g., death, natural processes of
growth and decay must be catalogued, smaller laws related to larger
ones. This scientific method (also attempted by Marx and Engels in their
materialist approach to history) is the attempt by man to master nature
through the complete understanding of its mechanics. The coaxing of
reality to conform with man’s conceptual ideal, through the application
of information extrapolated from itself, we shall call the Technological
Mode.

We have defined culture as the sum of, and the dialectic between, the
two different modes through which man can resolve the tension created by
the flexibility of his mental faculties within the limitations of his
given environment. The correspondence of these two different cultural
modes with the two sexes respectively is unmistakable. We have noted how
those few women directly creating culture have gravitated to disciplines
within the Aesthetic Mode. There is a good reason for this: the
aesthetic response corresponds with ‘female’ behaviour. The same
terminology can be applied to either: subjective, intuitive,
introverted, wishful, dreamy or fantastic, concerned with the
subconscious (the id), emotional, even temperamental (hysterical).
Correspondingly, the technological response is the masculine response:
objective, logical, extroverted, realistic, concerned with the conscious
mind (the ego), rational, mechanical, pragmatic and down-to-earth,
stable. Thus the aesthetic is the cultural recreation of that half of
the psychological spectrum that has been assigned to the female, whereas
the technological response is the cultural magnification of the male
half.

Just as we have assumed the biological division of the sexes for
procreation to be the fundamental ‘natural’ duality from which grows all
further division into classes, so we now assume the sex division to be
the root of this basic cultural division as well. The interplay between
these two cultural responses, the ‘male’ Technological Mode and the
‘female’ Aesthetic Mode, recreates at yet another level the dialectic of
the sexes – as well as its superstructure, the caste, and the
economic-class dialectic. And just as the merging of the divided sexual,
racial, and economic classes is a precondition for sexual, racial, or
economic revolution respectively, so the merging of the aesthetic with
the technological culture is the precondition of a cultural revolution.
And just as the revolutionary goal of the sexual, racial, and economic
revolutions is, rather than a mere levelling of imbalances, of class, an
elimination of class categories altogether, so the end result of a
cultural revolution must be, not merely the integration of the two
streams of culture, but the elimination of cultural categories
altogether, the end of culture itself as we know it. But before we
discuss this ultimate cultural revolution or even the state of cultural
division in our own time, let us see how this third level of the sex
dialectic – the interaction between the Technological and Aesthetic
Modes – operated to determine the flow of cultural history.

\*   \*   \*

At first technological knowledge accumulated slowly. Gradually man
learned to control the crudest aspects of his environment – he
discovered the tool, control of fire, the wheel, the melting of ore to
make weapons and ploughs, even, eventually, the alphabet – but these
discoveries were few and far between, because as yet he had no
systematic way of initiating them. Eventually however, he had gathered
enough practical knowledge to build whole systems, e.g., medicine or
architecture, to create juridical, political, social, and economic
institutions. Civilization developed from the primitive hunting horde
into an agricultural society, and finally, through progressive stages,
into feudalism, capitalism, and the first attempts at socialism.

But in all this time, man’s ability to picture an ideal world was far
ahead of his ability to create one. The primary cultural forms of
ancient civilizations – religion and its offshoots, mythology, legend,
primitive art and, magic, prophecy and history – were in the aesthetic
mode: they imposed only an artificial, imaginary order on a universe
still mysterious and chaotic. Even primitive scientific theories were
only poetic metaphors for what would later be realized empirically. The
science and philosophy and mathematics of classical antiquity,
forerunners of modern science, by sheer imaginative prowess, operating
in a vacuum independently of material laws, anticipated much of what was
later proven: Democritus’ atoms and Lucretius’ ‘substance’ foreshadowed
by thousands of years the discoveries of modern science. But they were
realized only within the realm of the imaginary aesthetic mode.

In the Middle Ages the Judaeo-Christian heritage was assimilated with
pagan culture, to produce medieval religious art and the metaphysics of
Thomas Aquinas and the Scholastics. Though concurrently Arab science, an
outgrowth of the Greek Alexandrian Period (third century B.C. to seventh
century A.D.), was amassing considerable information in such areas as
geography, astronomy, physiology, mathematics – a tabulation essential
to the later empiricism – there was little dialogue. Western science,
with its alchemy, its astrology, the ‘humours’ of medieval medicine, was
still in a ‘pseudo-scientific’ stage, or, in our definition, still
operating according to the aesthetic mode. This medieval aesthetic
culture, composed of the Classical and Christian legacies, culminated in
the Humanism of the Renaissance.

Until the Renaissance, then, culture occurred in the aesthetic mode
because, prior to that time, technology had been so primitive, the body
of scientific knowledge so far from complete. In terms of the sex
dialectic, this long stage of cultural history corresponds with the
matriarchal stage of civilization: the Female Principle – dark,
mysterious, uncontrollable – reigned, elevated by man himself, still in
awe of unfathomable Nature. Men of culture were its high priests of
homage: until and through the Renaissance all men of culture were
practitioners of the ideal aesthetic mode, thus, in a sense, artists.
The Renaissance, the pinnacle of cultural humanism, was the golden age
of the aesthetic (female) mode.

![image](images/00002.jpeg)

![image](images/00003.jpeg)

And also the beginning of its end. By the sixteenth century culture was
undergoing a change as profound as the shift from matriarchy to
patriarchy in terms of the sex dialectic, and corresponding to the
decline of feudalism in the class dialectic. This was the first merging
of the aesthetic culture with the technological, in the creation of
modern (empirical) science.

In the Renaissance, Aristotelian Scholasticism had remained powerful
though the first cracks in the dam were already apparent. But it was not
until Francis Bacon, who first proposed to use science to ‘extend more
widely the limits of the power and the greatnesses of man’, that the
marriage of the modes was consummated. Bacon and Locke transformed
philosophy, the attempt to understand life, from abstract speculation
detached from the real world (metaphysics, ethics, theology, aesthetics,
logic) to an uncovering of the real laws of nature, through proof and
demonstration (empirical science).

In the empirical method propounded by Francis Bacon, insight and
imagination had to be used only at the earliest stage of the inquiry.
Tentative hypotheses would be formed by induction from the facts, and
then consequences would be deduced logically and tested for consistency
among themselves and for agreement with the primary facts and results of
ad hoc experiments. The hypothesis would become an accepted theory only
after all tests had been passed, and would remain, at least until proven
wrong, a theory capable of predicting phenomena to a high degree of
probability.

The empirical view held that by recording and tabulating all possible
observations and experiments in this manner, the Natural Order would
emerge automatically. Though at first the question ‘why’ was still asked
as often as the question ‘how’, after information began to accumulate,
each discovery building upon the last to complete the jigsaw, the
speculative, the intuitive, and the imaginative gradually became less
valuable. When once the initial foundations had been laid by men of the
stature of Kepler, Galileo, and Newton, thinkers still in the inspired
‘aesthetic’ science tradition, hundreds of anonymous technicians could
move to fill in the blanks, leading to, in our own time, the dawn of a
golden age of science – to the technological mode what the Renaissance
had been to the aesthetic mode.

II

THE TWO CULTURES TODAY

Now, in 1970, we are experiencing a major scientific breakthrough. The
new physics, relativity, and the astrophysical theories of contemporary
science had already been realized by the first part of this century.
Now, in the latter part, we are arriving, with the help of the electron
microscope and other new tools, at similar achievements in biology,
biochemistry, and all the life sciences. Important discoveries are made
yearly by small, scattered work teams all over the United States, and in
other countries as well – of the magnitude of DNA in genetics, or of
Urey and Miller’s work in the early fifties on the origins of life. Full
mastery of the reproductive process is in sight, and there has been
significant advance in understanding the basic life and death process.
The nature of ageing and growth, sleep and hibernation, the chemical
functioning of the brain and the development of consciousness and memory
are all beginning to be understood in their entirety. This acceleration
promises to continue for another century, or however long it takes to
achieve the goal of Empiricism: total understanding of the laws of
nature.

This amazing accumulation of concrete knowledge in only a few hundred
years is the product of philosophy’s switch from the aesthetic to the
technological mode. The combination of ‘pure’ science, science in the
aesthetic mode, with pure technology, caused greater progress towards
the goal of technology – the realization of the conceivable in the
actual – than had been made in thousands of years of previous history.

Empiricism itself is only the means, a quicker and more effective
technique, for achieving technology’s ultimate cultural goal: the
building of the ideal in the real world. One of its own basic dictates
is that a certain amount of material must be collected and arranged into
categories before any decisive comparison, analysis, or discovery can be
made. In this light centuries of empirical science have been little more
than the building of foundations for the breakthroughs of our own time
and the future. The amassing of information and understanding of the
laws and mechanical processes of nature (‘pure research’) is but a means
to a larger end: total understanding of Nature in order, ultimately, to
achieve transcendence.

In this view of the development and goals of cultural history, Engels’s
final goal, quoted above in the context of political revolution, is
again worthy of quotation: ‘The whole sphere of the conditions of life
which environ man, and have hitherto ruled him, now comes under the
dominion and control of man, who for the first time becomes the real
conscious Lord of Nature.’ Empirical science is to culture what the
shift to patriarchy was to the sex dialectic, and what the bourgeois
period is to the Marxian dialectic – a latter-day stage prior to
revolution. Moreover, the three dialectics are integrally related to one
another vertically as well as horizontally: The empirical science
growing out of the bourgeoisie (the bourgeois period is in itself a
stage of the patriarchal period) follows the humanism of the aristocracy
(the Female Principle, the matriarchy) and with its development of the
empirical method in order to amass real knowledge (development of modern
industry in order to amass capital) eventually puts itself out of
business. The body of scientific discovery (the new productive modes)
must finally outgrow the empirical (capitalistic) mode of using them.

And just as the internal contradictions of capitalism must become
increasingly apparent, so must the internal contradictions of empirical
science – as in the development of pure knowledge to the point where it
assumes a life of its own, e.g., the atomic bomb. As long as man is
still engaged only in the means – the charting of the ways of nature,
the gathering of ‘pure’ knowledge – to his final realization, mastery of
nature, his knowledge, because it is not complete, is dangerous. So
dangerous that many scientists are wondering whether they shouldn’t put
a lid on certain types of research. But this solution is hopelessly
inadequate. The machine of empiricism has its own momentum, and is, for
such purposes, completely out of control. Could one actually decide what
to discover or not discover? That is, by definition, antithetical to the
whole empirical process that Bacon set in motion. Many of the most
important discoveries have been practically laboratory accidents, with
social implications barely realized by the scientists who stumbled into
them. For example, as recently as five years ago Professor F. C. Steward
of Cornell discovered a process called ‘cloning’: by placing a single
carrot cell in a rotating nutrient he was able to grow a whole sheet of
identical carrot cells, from which he eventually recreated the same
carrot. The understanding of a similar process for more developed animal
cells, were it to slip out – as did experiments with ‘mind-expanding’
drugs – could have some awesome implications. Or, again, imagine
parthenogenesis, virgin birth, as practised by the greenfly, actually
applied to human fertility.

Another internal contradiction in empirical science: the mechanistic,
deterministic, ‘soulless’ scientific world-view, which is the result of
the means to, rather than the (inherently noble and often forgotten)
ultimate purpose of, Empiricism: the actualization of the ideal in
reality.

The cost in humanity is particularly high to the scientist himself, who
becomes little more than a cultural technician. For, ironically enough,
to properly accumulate knowledge of the universe requires a mentality
the very opposite of comprehensive and integrated. Though in the long
run the efforts of the individual scientist could lead to domination of
the environment in the interest of humanity, temporarily the empirical
method demands that its practitioners themselves become ‘objective’,
mechanistic, overprecise. The public image of the white-coated Dr Jekyll
with no feelings for his subjects, mere guinea pigs, is not entirely
false: there is no room for feelings in the scientist’s work; he is
forced to eliminate or isolate them in what amounts to an occupational
hazard. At best he can resolve this problem by separating his
professional from his personal self, by compartmentalizing his emotion.
Thus, though often well-versed in an academic way about the arts – the
frequency of this, at any rate, is higher than of artists who are
well-versed in science – the scientist is generally out of touch with
his direct emotions and senses, or, at best, he is emotionally divided.
His ‘private’ and ‘public’ life are out of whack; and because his
personality is not well-integrated, he can be surprisingly conventional
(‘Dear, I discovered how to clone people at the lab today. Now we can go
skiing at Aspen.’) He feels no contradiction in living by convention,
even in attending church, for he has never integrated the amazing
material of modern science with his daily life. Often it takes the
misuse of his discovery to alert him to that connection which he has
long since lost in his own mind.

The catalogue of scientific vices is familiar: it duplicates,
exaggerates, the catalogue of ‘male’ vices in general. This is to be
expected: if the technological mode develops from the male principle
then it follows that its practitioners would develop the warpings of the
male personality in the extreme. But let us leave science for the
moment, winding up for the ultimate cultural revolution, to see what
meanwhile had been happening to the aesthetic culture proper.

With philosophy in the broadest classical sense – including ‘pure’
science – defecting, aesthetic culture became increasingly narrow and
ingrown, reduced to the arts and humanities in the refined sense that we
now know them. Art (hereafter referring to the ‘liberal arts’,
especially arts and letters) had always been, in its very definition, a
search for the ideal, removed from the real world. But in primitive days
it had been the handmaiden of religion, articulating the common dream,
objectifying ‘other’ worlds of the common fantasy, e.g., the art of the
Egyptian tombs, to explain and excuse this one. Thus even though it was
removed from the real world, it served an important social function: it
satisfied artificially those wishes of society that couldn’t yet be
realized in reality. Though it was patronized and supported only by the
aristocracy, the cultured elite, it was never as detached from life as
it later became; for the society of those times was, for all practical
purposes, synonymous with its ruling class, whether priesthood,
monarchy, or nobility. The masses were never considered by ‘society’ to
be a legitimate part of humanity, they were slaves, nothing more than
human animals, drones, or serfs, without whose labour the small cultured
elite could not have maintained itself.

The gradual squeezing out of the aristocracy by the new middle class,
the bourgeoisie, signalled the erosion of aesthetic culture. We have
seen that capitalism intensified the worst attributes of patriarchalism,
how, for example, the nuclear family emerged from the large, loose
family household of the past, to reinforce the weakening sex class
system, oppressing women and children more intimately than ever before.
The cultural mode favoured by this new, heavily patriarchal bourgeoisie
was the ‘male’ technological mode – objective, realistic, factual,
‘commonsense’ – rather than the effeminate, otherworldly, ‘romantic
idealist’ aesthetic mode. The bourgeoisie, searching for the ideal in
the real, soon developed the empirical science that we have described.
To the extent that they had any remaining use for aesthetic culture, it
was only for ‘realistic’ art, as opposed to the ‘idealistic’ art of
classical antiquity, or the abstract religious art of primitive or
medieval times. For a time they went in for a literature that described
reality – best exemplified by the nineteenth-century novel – and a
decorative easel art: still lifes, portraits, family scenes, interiors.
Public museums and libraries were built alongside the old salons and
private galleries. But with its entrenchment as a secure, even primary,
class, the bourgeoisie no longer needed to imitate aristocratic
cultivation. More important, with the rapid development of their new
science and technology, the little practical value they had for art was
eclipsed. Take the scientific development of the camera: the bourgeoisie
soon had little need for portrait painters; the little that painters or
novelists had been able to do for them, the camera could do better.

‘Modern’ art was a desperate, but finally self-defeating, retaliation
(‘épater le bourgeois’) for these injuries: the evaporation of its
social function, the severance of the social umbilical cord, the
dwindling of the old sources of patronage. The modern art tradition,
associated primarily with Picasso and Cézanne, and including all the
major schools of the twentieth century – cubism, constructivism,
futurism, expressionism, surrealism, abstract expressionism, and so on –
is not an authentic expression of modernity as much as it is a reaction
to the realism of the bourgeoisie. Post-impressionism deliberately
renounced all reality-affirming conventions – indeed the process began
with impressionism itself, which broke down the illusion into its formal
values, swallowing reality whole and spitting it up again as art – to
lead eventually to an art-for-art’s-sake so pure, a negation of reality
so complete as to make it ultimately meaningless, sterile, even absurd.
(Cab drivers are philistine: they know a put-on when they see one.) The
deliberate violating, deforming, fracturing of the image, called
‘modern’ art, was nothing more than a fifty-year idol smashing –
eventually leading to our present cultural impasse.

In the twentieth century, its life blood drained, its social function
nullified altogether, art is thrown back on whatever wealthy classes
remain, those nouveaux riches – particularly in America, still suffering
from a cultural inferiority complex – who still need to prove they have
‘arrived’ by evidencing a taste for culture. The sequestering of
intellectuals in ivory tower universities, where, except for the
sciences, they have little effect on the outside world, no matter how
brilliant (and they aren’t, because they no longer have the necessary
feedback); the abstruse – often literally unintelligible – jargon of the
social sciences; the cliquish literary quarterlies with their esoteric
poetry; the posh 57th Street galleries and museums (it is no accident
that they are right next door to Saks Fifth Avenue and Bonwit Teller)
staffed and supplied by, for the most part, fawning
rich-widows’-hairdresser types; and not least the vulturous critical
establishment thriving on the remains of what was once a great and vital
culture – all testify to the death of aesthetic humanism.

For in the centuries that Science climbed to new heights, Art decayed.
Its forced inbreeding transformed it into a secret code. By definition
escapist from reality, it now turned in upon itself to such degree that
it gnawed away its own vitals. It became diseased – neurotically
self-pitying, self-conscious, focused on the past (as opposed to the
futurist orientation of the technological culture) and thus frozen into
conventions and academies – orthodoxies of which ‘avant-garde’ is only
the latest – pining for remembered glories, the Grand Old Days When
Beauty Was In Flower; it became pessimistic and nihilistic, increasingly
hostile to the society at large, the ‘philistines’. And when the cocky
young Science attempted to woo Art from its ivory tower – eventually
garret – with false promises of the courting lover (‘You can come down
now, we’re making the world a better place every day’), Art refused more
vehemently than ever to deal with him, much less accept his corrupt
gifts, retreating ever deeper into her daydreams – neoclassicism,
romanticism, expressionism, surrealism, existentialism.

The individual artist or intellectual saw himself as either a member of
an invisible élite, a ‘highbrow’, or as a down-and-outer, mingling with
whoever was deemed the dregs of his society. In both cases, whether
playing Aristocrat or Bohemian, he was on the margins of the society as
a whole. The artist had become a freak. His increasing alienation from
the world around him – the new world that science had created was,
especially in its primitive stages, an incredible horror, only
intensifying his need to escape to the ideal world of art – his lack of
an audience, led to a mystique of ‘genius’. Like an ascetic Saint Simeon
on his pedestal, the Genius in the Garret was expected to create
masterpieces in a vacuum. But his artery to the outside world had been
severed. His task, increasingly impossible, often forced him literally
into madness, or suicide.

Painted into a corner with nowhere else to go, the artist has got to
begin to come to terms with the modern world. He is not too good at it:
like an invalid shut away too long, he doesn’t know anything about the
world anymore, neither politics, nor science, nor even how to live or
love. Until now, yes, even now, though less and less so, sublimation,
that warping of personality, was commendable: it was the only (albeit
indirect) way to achieve fulfilment. But the artistic process has –
almost – outlived its usefulness. And its price is high.

The first attempts to confront the modern world have been for the most
part misguided. The Bauhaus, a famous example, failed at its objective
of replacing an irrelevant easel art (only a few optical illusions and
designy chairs mark the grave), ending up with a hybrid, neither art nor
science, and certainly not the sum of the two. They failed because they
didn’t understand science on its own terms: to them, seeing in the old
aesthetic way, it was simply a rich new subject matter to be digested
whole into the traditional aesthetic system. It is as if one were to see
a computer as only a beautifully ordered set of lights and sounds,
missing completely the function itself. The scientific experiment is not
only beautiful, an elegant structure, another piece of an abstract
puzzle, something to be used in the next collage – but scientists, too,
in their own way, see science as this abstraction divorced from life –
it has a real intrinsic meaning of its own, similar to, but not the same
as, the ‘presence’, the ‘en-soi’, of modern painting. Many artists have
made the mistake of thus trying to annex science, to incorporate it into
their own artistic framework, rather than using it to expand that
framework.

Is the current state of aesthetic culture all bleak? No, there have been
some progressive developments in contemporary art. We have mentioned how
the realistic tradition in painting died with the camera. This tradition
had developed over centuries to a level of illusionism with the brush –
examine a Bouguereau – that was the equal of, better than, the early
photography, then considered only another graphic medium, like etching.
The beginning of the new art of film and the realistic tradition of
painting overlapped, peaked, in artists like Degas, who used a camera in
his work. Then realistic art took a new course: either it became
decadent, academic, divorced from any market and meaning, e.g., the
nudes that linger on in art classes and second-rate galleries, or it was
fractured into the expressionist or surrealist image, posing an
alternate internal or fantastical reality. Meanwhile, however, the young
art of film, based on a true synthesis of the aesthetic and
technological modes (as Empiricism itself had been), carried on the
vital realistic tradition. And just as with the marriage of the divided
male and female principles, empirical science bore fruit; so did the
medium of film. But, unlike other aesthetic media of the past, it broke
down the very division between the artificial and the real, between
culture and life itself, on which the aesthetic mode is based.

Other related developments: the exploration of artificial materials,
e.g., plastics; the attempt to confront plastic culture itself (pop
art); the breakdown of traditional categories of media (mixed media),
and of the distinctions between art and reality itself (happenings,
environments). But I find it difficult unreservedly to call these latter
developments progressive: as yet they have produced largely puerile and
meaningless works. The artist does not yet know what reality is, let
alone how to affect it. Paper cups lined up on the street, pieces of
paper thrown into an empty lot, no matter how many ponderous reviews
they get in Art News, are a waste of time. If these clumsy attempts are
at all hopeful, it is only in so far as they are signs of the breakdown
of ‘fine’ art.

The merging of the aesthetic with the technological mode will gradually
suffocate ‘pure’ high art altogether. The first breakdown of categories,
the re-merging of art with a (technologized) reality, indicates that we
are now in the transitional pre-revolutionary period, in which the three
separate cultural streams, technology (‘applied science’), ‘pure
research’, and ‘pure’ modern art, will melt together – along with the
rigid sex categories they reflect.

The sex-based polarity of culture still causes many casualties. If even
the ‘pure’ scientist, e.g., nuclear physicist (let alone the ‘applied’
scientist, e.g., engineer), suffers from too much ‘male’, becoming
authoritarian, conventional, emotionally insensitive, narrowly unable to
understand his own work within the scientific – let alone cultural or
social – jigsaw, the artist, in terms of the sex division, has embodied
all the imbalances and suffering of the female personality:
temperamental, insecure, paranoid, defeatist, narrow. And the recent
withholding of reinforcements from behind the front (the larger society)
has exaggerated all this enormously; his overdeveloped ‘id’ has nothing
left to balance it. Where the pure scientist is ‘schiz’, or worse,
ignorant of emotional reality altogether, the pure artist rejects
reality because of its lack of perfection, and, in modern centuries, for
its ugliness.

And who suffers the most, the blind (scientist) or the lame (artist)?
Culturally, we have had only the choice between one sex role or the
other: either a social marginality leading to self-consciousness,
introversion, defeatism, pessimism, oversensitivity, and lack of touch
with reality, or a split ‘professionalized’ personality, emotional
ignorance, the narrow views of the specialist.

THE ANTIKULTUR REVOLUTION

I have tried to show how the history of culture mirrors the sex
dichotomy in its very organization and development. Culture develops not
only out of the underlying economic dialectic, but also out of the
deeper sex dialectic. Thus, there is not only a horizontal dynamic, but
a vertical one as well: each of these three strata forms one more story
of the dialectics of history based on the biological dualism. At present
we have reached the final stages of Patriarchy, Capitalism (corporate
capitalism), and of the Two Cultures at once. We shall soon have a
triplicate set of preconditions for revolution, the absence of which is
responsible for the failure of revolutions of the past.

The difference between what is almost possible and what exists is
generating revolutionary forces.[3](#part0017.html#chapter9-3) We are
nearing – I believe we shall have, perhaps within a century, if the
snowball of empirical knowledge doesn’t smash first of its own velocity
– a cultural revolution, as well as a sexual and economic one. The
cultural revolution, like the economic revolution, must be predicated on
the elimination of the (sex) dualism at the origins not only of class,
but also of cultural division.

What might this cultural revolution look like? Unlike ‘cultural
revolutions’ of the past, it would not be merely a quantitative
escalation, more and better culture, in the sense that the Renaissance
was a high point of the aesthetic mode, or that the present
technological breakthrough is the accumulation of centuries of practical
knowledge about the real world. Great as they were, neither the
aesthetic nor the technological culture, even at their respective peaks,
ever achieved universality – either it was wholistic but divorced from
the real world, or it achieved ‘progress’, at the price of cultural
schizophrenia, and the falseness and dryness of ‘objectivity.’ What we
shall have in the next cultural revolution is the reintegration of the
Male (Technological Mode) with the Female (Aesthetic Mode), to create an
androgynous culture surpassing the highs of either cultural stream, or
even of the sum of their integrations. More than a marriage, rather an
abolition of the cultural categories themselves, a mutual cancelation—a
matter-antimatter explosion, ending with a poof! culture itself.

![image](images/00004.jpeg)

![image](images/00005.jpeg)

We shall not miss it. We shall no longer need it: by then humanity will
have mastered nature totally, will have realized in actuality its
dreams. With the full achievement of the conceivable in the actual, the
surrogate of culture will no longer be necessary. The sublimation
process, a detour to wish fulfillment, will give way to direct
satisfaction in experience, as felt now only by children, or adults on
drugs.[4](#part0017.html#chapter9-4) (Though normal adults ‘play’ to
varying degrees, the example that illustrates more immediately to almost
everyone the intense level of this future experience, ranking zero on a
scale of accomplishment—‘nothing to show for it’—but nevertheless
somehow always worth everyone’s while, is lovemaking.) Control and delay
of ‘id’ satisfaction by the ‘ego’ will be unnecessary; the id can live
free. Enjoyment will spring directly from being and acting itself, the
process of experience, rather than from the quality of achievement. When
the male Techonological Mode can at last produce in actuality what the
female Aesthetic Mode had envisioned, we shall have eliminated the need
for either.

10 The Ultimate Revolution: Demands and Speculations

FEMINISM AND ECOLOGY

Empirical science left repercussions in its wake: the sharp acceleration
of technology upset the natural order. But recent popular interest in
ecology, the study of man’s relationship to his environment, may, by
1970, have come too late. Certainly it is too late for conservationism,
the attempt to redress natural balances. What is called for is a
revolutionary ecological programme that would attempt to establish a
humane artificial (man-made) balance in place of the natural one, thus
also realizing the original goal of empirical science: human mastery of
matter.

The best new currents in ecology and social planning agree with feminist
aims. The way that these two social phenomena, feminism and
revolutionary ecology, have emerged with such coincidence illustrates a
historical truth: new theories and new movements do not develop in a
vacuum, they arise to spearhead the necessary social solutions to
contradictions in the environment. In this case, both movements have
arisen in response to the same contradiction: animal life within a
technology. In the case of feminism the problem is a moral one: the
biological family unit has always oppressed women and children, but now,
for the first time in history, technology has created real preconditions
for overthrowing these oppressive ‘natural’ conditions, along with their
cultural reinforcements. In the case of the new ecology, we find that
independent of any moral stance, for pragmatic – survival – reasons
alone, it has become necessary to free humanity from the tyranny of its
biology. Humanity can no longer afford to remain in the transitional
stage between simple animal existence and full control of nature. And we
are much closer to a major evolutionary jump, indeed, to direction of
our own evolution, than we are to a return to the animal kingdom through
which we evolved. Thus in view of accelerating technology, a
revolutionary ecological movement would have the same aim as the
feminist movement: control of the new technology for humane purposes,
the establishment of a new equilibrium between man and the artificial
environment he is creating, to replace the destroyed ‘natural’ balance.

What are some of the concerns of ecology that are of direct interest to
the feminist movement? I shall discuss briefly two issues of the new
ecology that particularly pertain to the new feminism: reproduction and
its control, including the population crisis and methods of fertility
control; and cybernation, the full takeover by machines of increasingly
complex functions, altering man’s age-old relation to work and wages.

Previously I had taken copious notes, written whole drafts on the
population explosion, quoting once again all sorts of frightening
statistics about the rate of population growth. But on second thought,
it seemed to me that I had heard it all before and so had everyone else.
Perhaps for the purposes of this book, we would do better to discuss why
these statistics are so consistently ignored. For, despite increasingly
dire pronouncements from every expert in the field, few people are
seriously worried. In fact, the laissez faire actually seems to grow in
direct proportion to the urgency for immediate action.

The relation between the two situations is direct: inability to confront
or deal with the problem creates a sham confidence, the extent of which
is borne out by a recent Gallup poll (3 August, 1968) in which, to the
question, ‘What do you find to be the most pressing problem confronting
the nation today?’ less than 1 per cent of the national sample of adults
questioned mentioned population. And yet at the very least, to quote
population experts Lincoln H. Day and Alice Taylor Day, in their book
Too Many Americans, ‘To support an increase of another 180,000,000
(forty-four more years, at current rates) this country would have to
undergo changes in the condition of life as radical as those that have
occurred since Columbus.’ This is the most conservative estimate. The
majority of demographers, biologists, and ecologists are considerably
more pessimistic. Books come out all the time on the subject, each with
a new slant to the terrors of the population explosion (If we had
reproduced at this rate since the time of Christ, by now we would have …
If we continue at this rate, starvation will look like … by the year …
So and so many rats congested in a room produce XYZ behavior …), books
with such titles as Famine, 1975, The Population Bomb, and so on.
Scientists themselves are in a panic: a well-known biologist at
Rockefeller University is reputed to have stopped speaking to his own
daughter after the birth of her third child; his students multiply at
their peril.

Yet the public remains convinced that science can solve the problem. One
reason the man on the street believes so ardently that ‘they’ can handle
it – in addition to the Witchdoctor Mystique that ‘they’ always seem to
find an answer for everything – is that information filters down so
slowly from above. For example, the public began to hear about the
‘green revolution’ only when scientists abandoned hope in it as anything
but a desperate stopgap measure to delay worldwide famine for another
generation; so rather than alarming, this information acted as a
bromide.

The Miracle-of-Modern-Science is only one of a whole stockpile of
arguments that, no matter how often they are disproven, keep bobbing up
again. There is the Food Surplus argument, the
Vast-Stretches-of-Unpopulated-Land argument, the Chinese Boogy-Woogy
(population increases defence strength), and many more, varying in their
sophistication with the social milieu of their propounders. It is
useless to argue – so I won’t do it here – for it is not at all a
question of correct information, or logic. There is something else
underlying all these arguments. What is it?

The chauvinism that develops in the family. We have discussed some of
the components of this family psychology: the patriarchal mentality
concerned with its sons only in so far as they are heir and ego
extension, in the private bid for immortality (why worry about the
larger social good just so long as You And Yours are ‘happy’);
Us-Against-Them chauvinism (blood is thicker); the division between the
abstract and the concrete, the public and the private (what could be
more abstract and public than a demographic statistic? what could be
more private and concrete than one’s own reproduction?); the
privatization of the sex experience; the power psychology; and so on.

Leftists and revolutionaries, unfortunately, are no exception to this
universal malpsychology generated by the family. They too indulge in
Us-Against-Themism, though this time in reverse. If ‘Us’, the
upper-class and highbrow intelligentsia, argues that ‘We better not have
a decrease in birth rates or the rabble and/or the weakminded will take
over’, ‘Them’, the ‘rabble’ (lately known as the ‘lunatic fringe’),
counters with paranoia about being birth-controlled out of existence –
‘Genocidel’ This fear is well-founded. However, it is also responsible
for a general failure of vision on the Left to see beneath the evil uses
of birth control to a genuine ecological problem which no number of
fancy arguments and bogey statistics can erase. It is true that
capitalist imperialist governments are only too glad to dispense birth
control devices to the Third World or to Blacks and the poor in the US
(particularly welfare mothers, who are often made into guinea pigs for
the latest experiments), while at home they think nothing of giving a
man a ten-year jail sentence for dispensing Emko Foam to a young, white,
unmarried coed; it is true that a redistribution of the world’s wealth
and resources would greatly ease the problem – even if it could happen
tomorrow. But the problem would still remain, for it exists
independently of traditional politics and economics, and thus could not
be solved by traditional politics and economics alone. These political
and economic complications are only aggravations of a genuine problem of
ecology. Once again radicals have failed to think radically enough:
capitalism is not the only enemy, redistribution of wealth and resources
is not the only solution, attempts to control population are not only
Third World Suppression in disguise.

But often there is a more serious error: results of the misuse of
technology are very often attributed to the use of technology per se.
(But do the black militants who advocate unchecked fertility for black
women allow themselves to become burdened with heavy bellies and too
many mouths to feed? One gathers that they find contraception of some
help in maintaining their active preaching schedules.) As was
demonstrated in the case of the development of atomic energy, radicals,
rather than breast-beating about the immorality of scientific research,
could be much more effective by concentrating their full energies on
demands for control of scientific discoveries by and for the people.
For, like atomic energy, fertility control, artificial reproduction,
cybernation, in themselves, are liberating – unless they are improperly
used.

What are the new scientific developments in the control of this
dangerously prolific reproduction? Already we have more and better
contraception than ever before in
history.[1](#part0017.html#chapter10-1) The old spanner-in-the-works
intervention against conception (diaphragms, condoms, foams, and
jellies) was only the beginning. Soon we shall have a complete
understanding of the entire reproductive process in all its complexity,
including the subtle dynamics of hormones and their full effects on the
nervous system. Present oral contraception is at only a primitive
(faulty) stage, only one of many types of fertility control now under
experiment. Artificial insemination and artificial inovulation are
already a reality. Choice of sex of the foetus, test-tube fertilization
(when capacitation of sperm within the vagina is fully understood) are
just around the corner. Several teams of scientists are working on the
development of an artificial placenta. Even parthenogenesis – virgin
birth – could be developed very soon.

Are people, even scientists themselves, culturally prepared for any of
this? Decidedly not. A recent Harris poll, quoted in Life magazine,
representing a broad sampling of Americans – including, for example,
Iowa farmers – found a surprising number willing to consider the new
methods. The hitch was that they would consider them only where they
reinforced and furthered present values of family life and reproduction,
e.g., to help a barren woman have her husband’s child. Any question that
could be interpreted as a furthering of liberation per se was rejected
flatly as unnatural. But note that it was not the ‘test tube’ baby
itself that was thought unnatural (25 percent agreed off the bat that
they themselves would use this method, let’s say, in case the wife was
barren), but the new value system, based on the elimination of male
supremacy and the family.

It is clear by now that research in the area of reproduction is itself
being impeded by cultural lag and sexual bias. The money allocated for
specific kinds of research, the kinds of research done are only
incidentally in the interests of women when at all. For example, work on
the development of an artificial placenta still has to be excused on the
grounds that it might save babies born prematurely. Thus, although it
would be far easier technically to transfer an embryo than a nearly
developed baby, all the money goes into the latter research. Or again,
that women are excluded from science is directly responsible for the
tabling of research on oral contraceptives for males. (Is it possible
that women are thought to make better guinea pigs because they are
considered by male scientists to be ‘inferior’? Or is it only because
male scientists worship male fertility?) There are great numbers of such
examples.

Fears of new methods of reproduction are so widespread that as of the
time of this writing, 1969, the subject, outside of scientific circles,
is still taboo. Even many women in the women’s liberation movement –
perhaps especially in the women’s liberation movement – are afraid to
express any interest in it for fear of confirming the suspicion that
they are ‘unnatural’, wasting a great deal of energy denying that they
are anti-motherhood, pro-artificial reproduction, and so on. Let me then
say it bluntly:

Pregnancy is barbaric. I do not believe, as many women are now saying,
that the reason pregnancy is viewed as not beautiful is due strictly to
cultural perversion. The child’s first response, ‘What’s wrong with that
Fat Lady?’; the husband’s guilty waning of sexual desire; the woman’s
tears in front of the mirror at eight months – are all gut reactions,
not to be dismissed as cultural habits. Pregnancy is the temporary
deformation of the body of the individual for the sake of the species.

Moreover, childbirth hurts. And it isn’t good for you. Three thousand
years ago, women giving birth ‘naturally’ had no need to pretend that
pregnancy was a real trip, some mystical orgasm (that far-away look).
The Bible said it: pain and travail. The glamour was unnecessary: women
had no choice. They didn’t dare squawk. But at least they could scream
as loudly as they wanted during their labour pains. And after it was
over, even during it, they were admired in a limited way for their
bravery; their valour was measured by how many children (sons) they
could endure bringing into the world.

Today all this has been confused. The cult of natural childbirth itself
tells us how far we’ve come from true oneness with nature. Natural
childbirth is only one more part of the reactionary hippie-Rousseauean
Return-to-Nature, and just as self-conscious. Perhaps a mystification of
childbirth, true faith, makes it easier for the woman involved.
Pseudo-yoga exercises, twenty pregnant women breathing deeply on the
floor to the conductor’s baton, may even help some women develop
‘proper’ attitudes (as in ‘I didn’t scream once’). The squirming husband
at the bedside, like the empathy pains of certain tribesmen (‘Just look
what I go through with you, dear’), may make a woman feel less alone
during her ordeal. But the fact remains: childbirth is at best necessary
and tolerable. It is not fun.

(Like shitting a pumpkin, a friend of mine told me when I inquired about
the Great-Experience-You’re-Missing.
What’s-wrong-with-shitting-shitting-can-be-fun says the School of the
Great Experience. It hurts, she says.
What’s-wrong-with-a-little-pain-as-long-as-it-doesn’t-kill-you? answers
the school. It is boring, she says.
Pain-can-be-interesting-as-an-experience says the school. Isn’t that a
rather high price to pay for interesting experience? she says.
But-look-you-get-a-reward, says the school:
a-baby-all-your-own-to-fuck-up-as-you-please. Well, that’s something,
she says. But how do I know it will be male like you?)

Artificial reproduction is not inherently dehumanizing. At very least,
development of the option should make possible an honest re-examination
of the ancient value of motherhood. At the present time, for a woman to
come out openly against motherhood on principle is physically dangerous.
She can get away with it only if she adds that she is neurotic,
abnormal, child-hating, and therefore ‘unfit’. (‘Perhaps later … when
I’m better prepared.’) This is hardly a free atmosphere of inquiry. At
least until the taboo is lifted, until the decision not to have children
or to have them by artificial means is as legitimate as traditional
child-bearing, women are as good as forced into their female roles.

Another scientific development that we find difficult to absorb into our
traditional value system is the new science of cybernetics: machines
that may soon equal or surpass man in original thinking and
problem-solving. While it may be argued, as with artificial
reproduction, that such machines are barely past the speculative stage,
remember that it was only five to ten years ago that experts in the
field were predicting that five or six computers would satisfy
permanently the needs of the whole country.

Cybernetics, like birth control, can be a double-edged sword. Like
artificial reproduction, to envision it in the hands of the present
powers is to envision a nightmare. We need not elaborate. Everyone is
familiar with Technocracy, 1984: the increased alienation of the masses,
the intensified rule of the élite (now perhaps cyberneticians), baby
factories, computerized government (Big Brother), and so on. In the
hands of the present establishment there is no doubt that the machine
could be used – is being used – to intensify the apparatus of repression
and to increase established power.

But again, as in the issue of population control, misuse of science has
often obscured the value of science itself. In this case, though perhaps
the response may not be quite so hysterical and evasive, we still often
have the same unimaginative concentration on the evils of the machine
itself, rather than a recognition of its revolutionary significance.
Books and research abound on how to avoid Technocracy, 1984 (e.g., Alan
Weston’s Privacy and Freedom), but there is little thought about how to
deal effectively with the qualitative changes in life style that
cybernation will bring.

The two issues, population control and cybernetics, produce the same
nervous superficial response because in both cases the underlying
problem is one for which there is no precedent: qualitative change in
humanity’s basic relationships to both its production and its
reproduction. We will need almost overnight, in order to deal with the
profound effects of fertility control and cybernation, a new culture
based on a radical redefinition of human relationships and leisure for
the masses. To so radically redefine our relationship to production and
reproduction requires the destruction at once of the class system as
well as the family. We will be beyond arguments about who is ‘bringing
home the bacon’ – no one will be bringing it home, because no one will
be ‘working’. Job discrimination would no longer have any basis in a
society where machines do the work better than human beings of any size
or skill could. Machines thus could act as the perfect equalizer,
obliterating the class system based on exploitation of labour.

What might the immediate impact of cybernation be on the position of
women? Briefly, we can predict the following: (1) While at first
automation will continue to provide new service jobs for women, e.g.,
keypunch operator, computer programmer, etc., these positions are not
likely to last long (precisely why women, the transient labour force par
excellence, are sought for them). Eventually, such simple specialized
control of machines will give way to a more widespread common knowledge
of their control and, at the same time, at top levels, increased
specialized knowledge of their newer, more complex functions by a new
élite of engineers, cyberneticians. The kinds of jobs into which women
have been welcomed, the lower rung of white-collar service jobs, will be
phased out. At the same time, housework also will become more
cybernated, reducing women’s legitimate work functions even further. (2)
Erosion of the status of the ‘head of the household,’ particularly in
the working class, may shake up family life and traditional sex roles
even more profoundly. (3) Massive unrest of the young, the poor, the
unemployed will increase: as jobs become more difficult to obtain, and
there is no cushioning of the cultural shock by education for leisure,
revolutionary ferment is likely to become a staple. Thus, all in all,
cybernation may aggravate the frustration that women already feel in
their roles, pushing them into revolution.

A feminist revolution could be the decisive factor in establishing a new
ecological balance: attention drawn to the population explosion, a
shifting of emphasis from reproduction to contraception, and demands for
the full development of artificial reproduction would provide an
alternative to the oppressions of the biological family; cybernation, by
changing man’s relationship to work and wages, by transforming activity
from ‘work’ to ‘play’ (activity done for its own sake), would allow for
a total redefinition of the economy, including the family unit in its
economic capacity. The double curse that man should till the soil by the
sweat of his brow and that woman should bear in pain and travail would
be lifted through technology to make humane living for the first time a
possibility. The feminist movement has the essential mission of creating
cultural acceptance of the new ecological balance necessary for the
survival of the human race in the twentieth century.

REVOLUTIONARY DEMANDS

Women, biologically distinguished from men, are culturally distinguished
from ‘human’. Nature produced the fundamental inequality – half the
human race must bear and rear the children of all of them – which was
later consolidated, institutionalized, in the interests of men.
Reproduction of the species cost women dearly, not only emotionally,
psychologically, culturally but even in strictly material (physical)
terms: before recent methods of contraception, continuous childbirth led
to constant ‘female trouble’, early ageing, and death. Women were the
slave class that maintained the species in order to free the other half
for the business of the world – admittedly often its drudge aspects, but
certainly all its creative aspects as well.

This natural division of labour was continued only at great cultural
sacrifice: men and women developed only half of themselves. The division
of the psyche into male and female to better reinforce the reproductive
division was tragic: the hypertrophy in men of rationalism, aggressive
drive, the atrophy of their emotional sensitivity, was a physical (war)
as well as a cultural disaster. The emotionalism and passivity of women
increased their suffering (we cannot speak of them in a symmetrical way,
since they were victimized as a class by the division). Sexually men and
women were channelled into a highly ordered – time, place, procedure,
even dialogue – heterosexuality restricted to the genitals, rather than
diffused over the entire physical being.

I submit, then, that the first demand for any alternative system must
be:

(1) The freeing of women from the tyranny of reproduction by every means
possible, and the diffusion of the child-rearing role to the society as
a whole, men as well as women.

There are many degrees of this. Already we have a (hard-won) acceptance
of ‘family planning’, if not contraception for its own sake. Proposals
are imminent for day-care centres, perhaps even twenty-four-hour
child-care centres staffed by men as well as women. But this, in my
opinion, is timid if not entirely worthless as a transition. We’re
talking about radical change. And though indeed it cannot come all at
once, radical goals must be kept in sight at all times. Day-care centres
buy women off. They ease the immediate pressure without asking why that
pressure is on women.

At the other extreme there are the more distant solutions based on the
potentials of modern embryology, that is, artificial reproduction,
possibilities still so frightening that they are seldom discussed
seriously. We have seen that the fear is to some extent justified: in
the hands of our current society and under the direction of current
scientists (few of whom are female or even feminist), any attempted use
of technology to ‘free’ anybody is suspect. But we are speculating about
post-revolutionary systems, and for the purposes of our discussion we
shall assume flexibility and good intentions in those working out the
change.

To free women thus from their biology would be to threaten the social
unit that is organized around biological reproduction and the subjection
of women to their biological destiny, the family. Our second demand also
will come as a basic contradiction to the family, this time the family
as an economic unit.

(2) The political autonomy, based on economic independence, of both
women and children.

To achieve this goal would require revolutionary changes in our social
and economic structure. That is why we must talk about, in addition to
radically new forms of breeding, a cybernetic communism. For without
advanced technology, even eliminating capitalism, we could withstand
only a marginal integration of women into the labour force. Margaret
Benston has pointed out the importance of distinguishing between the
industrial economy based on commodity production, and the pre-industrial
economy of the family, production for immediate use: because the work of
women is not part of the modern economy, its function as the very basis
of that economy is easily overlooked. Talk of drafting women en masse
into the superstructure economy thus fails to deal with the tremendous
amount of labour of the more traditional kind that – prior to full
cybernation – still must be done. Who will do it?

Even paying the masses of women for doing this labour, could we swing it
– multiply the 99.6 woman-hours per week (conservatively estimated by
the Chase Manhattan Bank) by even a minimum hourly wage, times half the
(previously slave) population, and you are calculating the overthrow of
capitalism – would constitute only a reform in revolutionary feminist
terms, for it does not begin to challenge the root division of labour
and thus could never eradicate its disastrous psycho-cultural
consequences.

As for the independence of children, that is really a pipe dream,
realized as yet nowhere in the world. For, in the case of children, too,
we are talking about more than a fair integration into the labour force;
we are talking about the obsolescence of the labour force itself through
cybernation, the radical restructuring of the economy to make ‘work’,
i.e. compulsory labour, particularly alienated ‘wage’ labour, no longer
necessary.

We have now attacked the family on a double front, challenging that
around which it is organized: reproduction of the species by females and
its outgrowth, the dependence of women and children. To eliminate these
would be enough to destroy the family, which breeds the psychology of
power. However, we will break it down still further.

(3) The complete integration of women and children into society.

All institutions that segregate the sexes, or bar children from adult
society, must be destroyed. (Down with school!)

And if male/female-adult/child cultural distinctions are destroyed, we
will no longer need the sexual repression that maintains these unequal
classes, uncovering for the first time natural sexual freedom. Thus we
arrive at:

(4) The sexual freedom of all women and children. Now they can do
whatever they wish to do sexually. There will no longer be any reason
not to. Past reasons: full sexuality threatened the continuous
reproduction necessary for human survival, and thus, through religion
and other cultural institutions, sexuality had to be restricted to
reproductive purposes, all non-reproductive sex pleasure considered
deviation or worse: the sexual freedom of women would call into question
the fatherhood of the child, thus threatening patrimony; child sexuality
had to be repressed by means of the incest taboo because it was a threat
to the precarious internal balance of the family. These sexual
repressions increased proportionately to the degree of cultural
exaggeration of the biological family.

But in our new society, humanity could finally revert to its natural
polymorphous sexuality – all forms of sexuality would be allowed and
indulged. The fully sexuate mind, realized in the past in only a few
individuals (survivors), would become universal. Artificial cultural
achievement would no longer be the only avenue to sexuate
self-realization: one could now realize oneself fully, simply in the
process of being and acting.

THREE FAILED EXPERIMENTS

These structural imperatives must form the basis of any more specific
radical feminist programme. But our revolutionary demands are likely to
meet anything from mild balking (‘utopian … unrealistic … farfetched …
too far in the future … impossible … so, the system stinks, but you
haven’t got anything better…’) to hysteria (‘inhuman … unnatural …
sick … perverted … communistic … 1984 … what? creative motherhood
destroyed for babies in glass tubes, monsters made by scientists?,
etc.’). But we have seen that such defensive reactions on the contrary
may signify how close we are hitting: revolutionary feminism is the only
radical programme that immediately cracks through to the emotional
strata underlying ‘serious’ politics, thus reintegrating the personal
with the public, the subjective with the objective, the emotional with
the rational – the female principle with the male.

What are some of the prime components of this resistance that is keeping
people from experimenting with alternatives to the family, and where
does it come from? We are all familiar with the details of Brave New
World: cold collectives, with individualism abolished, sex reduced to a
mechanical act, children become robots, Big Brother intruding into every
aspect of private life, rows of babies fed by impersonal machines,
eugenics manipulated by the state, genocide of cripples and retards for
the sake of a super-race created by white-coated technicians, all
emotion considered weakness, love destroyed, and so on. The family
(which, despite its oppressiveness, is now the last refuge from the
encroaching power of the state, a shelter that provides the little
emotional warmth, privacy, and individual comfort now available) would
be destroyed, letting this horror penetrate indoors.

Ironically, one reason for the continual recurrence of ‘1984’ so
frequently is that it grows directly out of, signifying an exaggeration
of, the evils of our present male-supremacist culture. For example, many
of its visual details are lifted directly from our orphanages and
state-run institutions for children.[2](#part0017.html#chapter10-2) This
is a vision of a society in which women have become like men, crippled
in the identical way, thus destroying a delicate balance of interlocking
dependencies.

However, we are suggesting the opposite: rather than the concentration
of the female principle into a ‘private’ retreat, into which men can
periodically duck for relief, we want to rediffuse it – for the first
time truly creating society from the bottom up. Man’s difficult triumph
over Nature has made it possible to restore the truly natural: he could
undo both his own and Eve’s curse, to re-establish the earthly Garden of
Eden. But in his long toil his imagination has been stifled: he fears
rather the enlargement of his drudgery, the addition of Eve’s curse to
his own.

But there is a more concrete reason why this subliminal horror image
operates to destroy serious consideration of feminism: the failure of
past social experiments. Radical experiments, when they have solved
problems at all, have created an entirely new – and not necessarily
improved – set of problems in their place. Let us look briefly at some
of these radical experiments to determine the causes of their failure –
for I believe that in no case was the failure surprising given the
original postulates of the experiment, within its particular social
context. We can then use this information as another valuable negative
guideline, teaching us what most to avoid in our own programme.

\*   \*   \*

Of all the modern social experiments the most important failure was that
of the Russian communes. (The failure of the Russian Revolution in
general is a thorn in every radical’s side; but its direct relation to
the failure of the communes is seldom noted.) It led, ironically, to the
assumption of a causal connection between the abolition of the family
and the development of a totalitarian state. In this view, the later
Russian reinstitution of the nuclear family system is seen as a
last-ditch attempt to salvage humanist values – privacy, individualism,
love, etc., by then rapidly disappearing.

But it is the reverse: the failure of the Russian Revolution to achieve
the classless society is traceable to its half-hearted attempts to
eliminate the family and sexual repression. This failure, in turn, was
due to the limitations of a male-biased revolutionary analysis based on
economic class alone, one that failed to take the family fully into
account even in its function as an economic unit. By the same token, all
socialist revolutions to date have been or will be failures for
precisely these reasons. Any initial liberation under current socialism
must always revert back to repression, because the family structure is
the source of psychological, economic, and political oppression.
Socialist attempts to soften the structure of power within the family by
incorporating women into the labour force or army are only reformist.
Thus it is no surprise that socialism as it is now constituted in the
various parts of the world is not only no improvement on capitalism, but
often worse.

This develops a major component of 1984: the destruction of the family
as the last refuge for intimacy, comfort, privacy, individualism, etc.,
and the complete encroachment of the superstructure economy into all
aspects of life, the drafting of women into a male world, rather than
the elimination of sex class distinction altogether. Because no
provision has been made to re-establish the female element in the
outside world, to incorporate the ‘personal’ into the ‘public’, because
the female principle has been minimized or obliterated rather than
diffused to humanize the larger society, the result is a horror.

Wilhelm Reich in The Sexual Revolution summarized the specific objective
reasons for the failure of the Russian communes in the best analysis to
date:

(1) Confusion of the leadership and evasion of the problem.

(2) The laborious task of reconstruction in general given the cultural
backwardness of Old Russia, the war, and famine.

(3) Lack of theory. The Russian Revolution was the first of its kind. No
attempt had been made to deal with emotional-sexual-familial problems in
the formulation of basic revolutionary theory. (Or, in our terms, there
had been a lack of ‘consciousness raising’ about female/child oppression
and a lack of radical feminist analysis prior to the revolution itself.)

(4) The sex-negative psychological structure of the individual, created
and reinforced throughout history by the family, hindered the
individual’s liberation from this very structure. As Reich puts it: ‘It
must be remembered that human beings have a tremendous fear of just that
kind of life for which they long so much but which is at variance with
their own structure.’

(5) The explosive concrete complexities of sexuality.

In the picture that Reich draws of the time, one senses the immense
frustration of people trying to liberate themselves without having a
well-thought-out ideology to guide them. In the end, that they attempted
so much without adequate preparation made their failure even more
extreme: To destroy the balance of sexual polarization without entirely
eliminating it was worse than nothing at all.

\*   \*   \*

Another experimental communal system, widely touted, is the kibbutz in
Israel. Here, though, the failure is not extreme: the most common
criticism is that children of the kibbutz lack individualism, that there
is a ‘groupiness’ in their psychology that is the price of elimination
of the family. (‘And if you want to pay the price … well…’) Here, though
there are many studies of the effects of kibbutz life, I prefer to
present my own experience.

The division of labour remains. In my short stay, I observed the
following: an American registered nurse could not land a job in the
infirmary – because all women were needed in the kitchen. A job in the
sandal shop was given to a boy apprentice, rather than a woman skilled
in leatherwork. Only foreign girls were so naive as to question why
women aren’t out in the fields, but instead confined to the laundry, the
sewing room, or at best, the chicken house. (One woman explained to me
that driving a tractor is apt to ruin a woman’s complexion.)

Children identify strongly with their genetic parents (one hears over
and over again the words Ema Sheli, Abba Sheli, ‘My mother, My father,’
in the same tone as every child on every block in the U S says, ‘If you
don’t do it I’ll tell my Dad’, or ‘My moma’s gona beat your ass’).
Family ties remain strong, even if their worst consequences have been
avoided.

Above all, children are still segregated into their own special
facilities and programmes: miniature animal farms, special mealtimes,
etc. Schooling follows the European model, even if some of its worst
aspects, such as ‘grades’, have been eliminated: the classroom
continues, with its twenty-to-one ratio, adult approval still the final
goal rather than learning for its own sake.

Sex role models are fostered, sexegration not eliminated (there are
different bathrooms for male and female), and homo-or bi-sexuality so
unheard of that when I brought it up several women walked out of the
room in protest. All rumours to the contrary, the kibbutz is
increasingly conservative sexually (if it is embarrassing for a single
woman to ask for birth control pills, VD is a disgrace), and any
alliance other than a long-term one with a socially approved partner is
frowned upon. Sexuality on the kibbutz remains conventionally organized,
little different from the sexuality of the larger society. The incest
taboo with all its repressive consequences has simply been extended from
the family to the peer group.

In fact the kibbutz is no radical experiment, but a limited communalism
instituted to further specific agricultural aims. The kibbutz is nothing
more than a community of farming pioneers temporarily forced to
sacrifice traditional social structures to better adjust to a peculiar
set of national conditions. If and when these conditions change, the
kibbutz reverts to ‘normal’. For example, women on the far left kibbutz
at which I stayed were concerned with demanding private kitchens in
addition to the communal one from which meals were served six times a
day. They were still cast in the role of Gracious Wife, but had been
denied the proper equipment to play the part. Their interest in
clothing, fashion, makeup, glamour, not easy to indulge, resembled,
indeed was, the longing of the farm girl for the vices of the big city –
the more as intense in fantasy as it was difficult to achieve in
practice. Or, going through the residential section of the kibbutz in
the early evening, I could easily imagine that I was walking through a
small town or a quiet suburbia in the USA: the matchbox homes were cared
for with the attention to private property of any petit bourgeois, the
decoration of apartments just as devoted. (The reversion back to
property was explained to me as ‘only realistic’. Formerly kibbutzniks
had shared even personal clothing, but soon got sick of this.) Property
is still the necessary extension of a deficient self – because children
are still property. The line of Little Ones following Big Mama out of
the House of Children looks like that of any kindergarten anywhere.
Children are still oppressed.

What is remarkable is that despite the lack of depth in the kibbutz
experiment it turned out as well as it did. The proportionate results of
even a weakening of the division of labour, the nuclear family and the
resulting of sex repression, property mentality, etc., are spectacular.
My impression was that the children were healthier physically, mentally,
and emotionally than their counterparts in the American family
structure; that they were friendlier and more generous, with great
curiosity about the world outside; that their parents were not so
nervous and hassled, and thus were able to maintain better relationships
with them; and that their creativity and individuality were encouraged
as much as the community could afford.

\*   \*   \*

Another limited but much-touted experiment which has produced
disproportionately good results is A. S. Neill’s Summerhill. In the
famous book about his small experimental school in England, Summerhill:
A Radical Approach to Childrearing (a book on the shelf of every
self-respecting liberal, radical, Bohemian, and/or academic parent in
the country), he describes the transition of normal children into ‘free’
self-regulating children. But Summerhill is no ‘radical’ approach to
child-rearing – it is a liberal one. Neill, an educational innovation
rather than a true revolutionary,[3](#part0017.html#chapter10-3) has set
up a small retreat for those victims of our present system whose parents
have the money and liberal views to send them there. Within this retreat
children are spared the more harmful effects of the authoritarianism
inherent in the family; equality is encouraged by those who govern the
place, an obvious contradiction (Neill’s vote counts as only one, though
I imagine that in real crisis, the decision does not come up for vote.
In any case, children always know who’s boss, benevolent though he might
be), and compulsory education is relaxed: children learn only when they
want to. However, the structure of the class, if loosened, remains
unchanged. Or, another example, though masturbation is not frowned on,
sexual intercourse is definitely not encouraged (after all, Neill
remembers, ‘they’ can close down the school). What’s worse, sex roles
have not begun to be eliminated,[4](#part0017.html#chapter10-4)
something beyond the scope of such an experiment, since children are
already psychosexually formed by the family by the time they come in, at
five or over. In all respects then – psychologically, sexually,
educationally – we have only a softening of some of the harshest aspects
of the system.

Clearly the problem has not been attacked at the roots. Legally children
are still under the jurisdiction of parents. (And kids can’t mail away
for the sort of parents who will send them to Summerhill.) Neill
continually complains of parents, who can undo all his work in one
vacation, or drag the child away the minute the worst effects of the
victimization have disappeared. He is afraid of their power over him.
After all, he is at their service: if they are not satisfied with the
product, the shadowy ‘they’ will have the final say. Even when the
parents are devoted followers of the Summerhill
philosophy,[5](#part0017.html#chapter10-5) they are a nuisance with
their constant visits and questions. Between the two, admiring visitors
and dubious investigators (including a whole array of official ones),
the children must get accustomed to living in a zoo, hardly much of an
improvement on their usual status as ‘precious’ object.

And how could it be otherwise? Summerhill is an insulated refuge in
which children are more – not less – segregated from adults, even from
the ordinary life of the town. And the school owes its very existence to
‘parents’ and liberal donors. It is hardly a self-sufficient community
with its own economy, and thus it is prone to become a year-round camp
for disturbed children, whose parents have been backed into liberalism
as a last resort. Because children far outnumber the adults, and justify
the project, their wishes and opinions are observed and ‘respected’ more
than in most places in the world, but it is an artificial respect not
based on a true integration into a real community.

And if, with only these superficial reforms, children illustrate
remarkably improved behaviour, their aggression, repression, and
hostility replaced by authentic courtesy, psychological breadth, and
honesty, then think what we might expect under truly revolutionary
conditions.

\*   \*   \*

A detailed study of these and other social experiments from the radical
feminist viewpoint would be a valuable contribution to feminist theory.
We have been brief: we have discussed some of the more important modern
social experiments primarily to show that they do not fulfil our four
conditions for feminist revolution.

Let us summarize the causes of failure:

(1) The biological ties of women to reproduction (and thence
child-rearing), leading to unequal division of labour, class based on
sex, the psychology of power, and other evils, were never severed. The
female role was extended rather than eliminated: some women were merely
granted a new job to add to their old one. Thus although women may have
been (partially) drafted into the superstructure male economy, usually
only to fill a transient labour need, never has the female role been
diffused throughout the larger society.

(2) In some cases, such as Summerhill, the experiment was dependent on
the economy – and the good will — of a larger (and more repressive)
community, and thus was parasitic, unsound at its foundations. However,
in those communities with socialism at the origins of the experiment,
this was not so much the problem. Children of the communes and the
kibbutz feel as dependent on the community as a whole as they do on any
specific person; often they even share in the productive work. Only in
the division of labour are these experiments still (in economic terms)
at fault, and that, we know, develops for other reasons.

(3) Continued segregation of children and a failure to do away with or
at least radically restructure school. The methods of segregation have
varied, ranging from the extreme of the barracks-like orphanage to the
more liberal camp setting of a Summerhill, or the Beit Yeladim of the
kibbutz. But though its destructive impact may have been cushioned, in
no case has the concept of childhood itself been questioned, or the
apparatus of childhood (the elementary school, special literature,
‘toys’, etc.) discarded altogether.

(4) Sexual repression continues, partly as the result of the failure to
sever the umbilical-cord-tying special connection between women and
children and partly because the pioneers were unable to overcome their
own ‘sex-negative’ structures.[6](#part0017.html#chapter10-6)

I shall add a fifth cause of failure:

(5) There was no development of a feminist consciousness and analysis
prior to the initiation of the experiment. The best example of this
failing is our current American communal experiments, which merely
extend the family structure to include a larger number of people. The
division of labour remains, because woman’s role in (child) bed or
kitchen has not been questioned, nor male the role of provider. And
since the mother/child symbiosis remains intact, it is no wonder that
when the commune breaks up, all the ‘godparents’ disappear, as well as
the genetic father himself, leaving the mother stuck – without even the
protection of an ordinary marriage.

Thus never has there been a true instance of full membership of women
and children in the larger society. The modern social experiment, like
the matriarchal stage of human history, signifies only a relative
loosening within the consolidation of male supremacy through history. It
never altered the fundamental condition of sex oppression. Any benefits
that accrued to women and children were incidental to other social
objectives – which themselves were obstructed by the vast, unrecognized
substratum of sex oppression. Because their ideology was not founded on
the minimal feminist premises above, these experiments never achieved
even the more limited democratic goals their (male) theorists and
leaders had predicted. However, their success within narrow spheres
shows that the biological family unit is amenable to change. But we
would have to discard it totally before we could hope to eliminate the
oppression altogether.

\*   \*   \*

However – to be fair – it is only recently, in the most technologically
advanced countries, that genuine preconditions for feminist revolution
have begun to exist. For the first time it is becoming possible to
attack the family not only on moral grounds – in that it reinforces
biologically-based sex class, promoting adult males (who are then
divided further among themselves by race and class privilege) over
females of all ages and male children – but also on functional grounds:
it is no longer necessary or most effective as the basic social unit for
reproduction/production. Cybernetics, in questioning not only man’s
relation to work but the value of work itself, will eventually strip the
division of labour at the root of the family of any remaining practical
value; and as for reproduction, we no longer need universal
reproduction, even if the development of artificial reproduction does
not soon place biological reproduction itself in question.

THE SLOW DEATH OF THE FAMILY

The increasing erosion of the functions of the family by modern
technology should, by now, have caused some signs of its weakening.
However, this is not clearly the case. Though the institution is
archaic, artificial cultural reinforcements have been imported to
bolster it: sentimental sermons, manuals of guidance, daily columns in
newspapers and magazines, special courses, services, and institutions
for professional couples, parents, and teachers, nostalgia, warnings to
individuals who question or evade it, and finally, if the number of
dropouts becomes a serious threat, a real backlash, including outright
persecution of nonconformists. The last has not happened perhaps only
because it is not yet necessary.

Marriage is in the same state as the Church: both are becoming
functionally defunct, as their preachers go about heralding a revival,
eagerly chalking up converts in the day of dread. And just as God has
been pronounced dead quite often but has this sneaky way of resurrecting
himself, so everyone debunks marriage, yet ends up
married.[7](#part0017.html#chapter10-7)

What is keeping marriage so alive? I have pointed out some of the
cultural bulwarks of marriage in the twentieth century. We have seen how
the romantic tradition of nonmarital love, the hetairism that was the
necessary adjunct to monogamic marriage, has been purposely confused
with that most pragmatic of institutions, to render it more appealing –
thus restraining people from experimenting with other social forms that
could satisfy their emotional needs as well or better.

Under increasing pressure, with the pragmatic bases of the marriage
institution blurred, sex roles relaxed to a degree that would have
disgraced a Victorian. He had no crippling doubts about his role, nor
about the function and value of marriage. To him it was simply an
economic arrangement of some selfish benefit, one that would most easily
satisfy his physical needs and reproduce his heirs. His wife, too, was
clear about her duties and rewards: ownership of herself and of her full
sexual, psychological, and housekeeping services for a lifetime, in
return for long-term patronage and protection by a member of the ruling
class, and – in her turn – limited control over the children until they
reached a certain age. Today this contract based on divided roles has
been so disguised by sentiment that it goes completely unrecognized by
millions of newly-weds, and even by most older married couples.

But this blurring of the economic contract, and the resulting confusion
of sex roles, has not significantly eased woman’s oppression. In many
cases it has put her in only a more vulnerable position. With the
clear-cut arrangement of matches by parents all but abolished, a woman,
still part of an underclass, must now, in order to gain the
indispensable male patronage and protection, play a desperate game,
hunting down bored males while yet appearing cool. And even once she is
married, any overlap of roles generally takes place on the wife’s side,
not on the husband’s: the ‘cherish and protect’ clause is the first
thing forgotten – while the wife has gained the privilege of going to
work to ‘help out’, even of putting her husband through school. More
than ever she shoulders the brunt of the marriage, not only emotionally,
but now also in its more practical aspects. She has simply added his job
to hers.

A second cultural prop to the outmoded institution is the privatization
of the marriage experience: each partner enters marriage convinced that
what happened to his parents, what happened to his friends can never
happen to him. Though Wrecked Marriage has become a national hobby, a
universal obsession – as witnessed by the booming business of guidebooks
to marriage and divorce, the women’s magazine industry, an affluent
class of marriage counsellors and shrinks, whole repertoires of
Ball-and-Chain jokes and gimmicks, and cultural products such as soap
opera, the marriage-and-family genre on TV, e.g., I Love Lucy or Father
Knows Best, films and plays like Cassavetes’s Faces and Albee’s Who’s
Afraid of Virginia Woolf? – still one encounters everywhere a defiant
‘We’re different’ brand of optimism in which the one good (outwardly
exemplary, anyway) marriage in the community is habitually cited to
prove that it is possible.

Sex privatism is exposed in comments like, ‘Well, I know I’d make a
great mother.’ It is useless to point out that everyone says that, that
the very parents or friends now dismissed as ‘bad’ parents and ‘poor’
marital partners all began marriage and parenthood in exactly the same
spirit. After all, does anyone choose to have a ‘bad’ marriage? Does
anyone choose to be a ‘bad’ mother? And even if it were a question of
‘good’ vs. ‘bad’ marital partners or parents, there will always be as
many of the latter as the former; under the present system of universal
marriage and parenthood just as many spouses and children must pull a
bad lot as a good one; in fact any classes of ‘good’ and ‘bad’ are bound
to recreate themselves in identical
proportion.[8](#part0017.html#chapter10-8) Thus the privatization
process functions to keep people blaming themselves, rather than the
institution, for its failure: though the institution consistently proves
itself unsatisfactory, even rotten, the blinkers they wear allow them to
believe that somehow their own case will be different.

Warnings can have no effect, because logic has nothing to do with why
people get married. Everyone has eyes of his own, parents of his own. If
she chooses to block all evidence, it is because she must. In a world
out of control, the only institutions that grant the individual an
illusion of control, that seem to offer any safety, shelter or warmth,
are the ‘private’ institutions: religion, marriage/family, and, most
recently, psychoanalytic therapy. But, as we have seen, the family is
neither private nor a refuge, but is directly connected to – is even the
cause of – the ills of the larger society which the individual is no
longer able to confront.

But the cultural bulwarks we have just discussed – the confusion of
romance with marriage, blurring its original functions and the sex roles
necessary to maintain them; the illusions of control and refuge, sex
privatism, all of which exploit the fears of the contemporary person
living within an increasingly hostile environment – still are not the
whole answer to why the institution of marriage continues to thrive. It
would be facile to attribute the continuation of the family solely to
reaction, but such negatives alone could never maintain the family as a
vital institution. No, I am afraid we shall find, in measuring marriage
against our four minimal feminist demands, that it fulfils (in its own
miserable way) at least a portion of the requirements at least as well
as or better than did most of the social experiments we have discussed.

(1) Freedom of women from the tyranny of reproduction and child-bearing
is hardly fulfilled. However, women are often relieved of its worst
strains by a servant class (that is, some slaves are given others as
personal servants) – and in the modern marriage, by gynaecology, ‘family
planning’, and the increasing takeover, by the school, day-care centres,
and the like, of the child-rearing function.

(2) Though financial independence of women and children is not generally
granted, there is a substitute: physical security.

(3) Women and children, segregated from the larger society, are
integrated within the family unit, the only place where this occurs.
That the little interplay between men, women, and children is
concentrated in one social unit makes that unit all the more difficult
to renounce.

(4) Though the family is the source of sexual repression, it guarantees
the conjugal couple a steady, if not satisfactory, sex supply, and
provides the others with ‘aim-inhibited’ relationships, which are, in
many cases, the only long-term relationships these individuals will ever
have.

Thus there are practical assets of marriage to which people cling. It is
not all a cultural sales job. On a scale of percentages, marriage – at
least in its desperate liberalized version – would fare as well as most
of the experimental alternatives thus far tried, which, as we have seen,
also fulfilled some of the stipulations and not others, or only
partially fulfilled all of them. And marriage has the added advantage of
being a known quantity.

And yet marriage in its very definition will never be able to fulfil the
needs of its participants, for it was organized around, and reinforces,
a fundamentally oppressive biological condition that we only now have
the skill to correct. As long as we have the institution we shall have
the oppressive conditions built into it. We need to start talking about
new alternatives that will satisfy the emotional and psychological needs
that marriage, archaic as it is, still satisfies, but that will satisfy
them better. But in any proposal we shall have to do at least one better
than marriage on our feminist scale, or despite all warnings people will
stay hooked – in the hope that just this once, just for them, marriage
will come across.

ALTERNATIVES

The classic trap for any revolutionary is always, ‘What’s your
alternative?’ But even if you could provide the interrogator with a
blueprint, this does not mean he would use it: in most cases he is not
sincere in wanting to know. In fact this is a common offensive, a
technique to deflect revolutionary anger and turn it against itself.
Moreover, the oppressed have no job to convince all people. All they
need know is that the present system is destroying them.

But though any specific direction must arise organically out of the
revolutionary action itself, still I feel tempted here to make some
‘dangerously utopian’ concrete proposals – both in sympathy for my own
pre-radical days when the Not-Responsible-For-Blueprint Line perplexed
me, and also because I am aware of the political dangers in the peculiar
failure of imagination concerning alternatives to the family. There are,
as we have seen, several good reasons for this failure. First, there are
no precedents in history for feminist revolution – there have been women
revolutionaries, certainly, but they have been used by male
revolutionaries, who seldom gave even lip service to equality for women,
let alone to a radical feminist restructuring of society. Moreover, we
haven’t even a literary image of this future society; there is not even
a utopian feminist literature yet in existence. Thirdly, the nature of
the family unit is such that it penetrates the individual more deeply
than any other social organization we have: it literally gets him ‘where
he lives’. I have shown how the family shapes his psyche to its
structure – until ultimately, he imagines it absolute, talk of anything
else striking him as perverted. Finally, most alternatives suggest a
loss of even the little emotional warmth provided by the family,
throwing him into a panic. The model that I shall now draw up is subject
to the limitations of any plan laid out on paper by a solitary
individual. Keep in mind that these are not meant as final answers, that
in fact the reader could probably draw up another plan that would
satisfy as well or better the four structural imperatives laid out
above. The following proposals, then, will be sketchy, meant to
stimulate thinking in fresh areas rather than to dictate the action.

\*   \*   \*

What is the alternative to 1984 if we could have our demands acted on in
time?

The most important characteristic to be maintained in any revolution is
flexibility. I will propose, then, a programme of multiple options to
exist simultaneously, interweaving with each other, some transitional,
others far in the future. An individual may choose one ‘life style’ for
one decade, and prefer another at another period.

(1) Single professions. A single life organized around the demands of a
chosen profession, satisfying the individual’s social and emotional
needs through its own particular occupational structure, might be an
appealing solution for many individuals, especially in the transitional
period.

Single professions have practically vanished, despite the fact that the
encouragement of reproduction is no longer a valid social concern. The
old single roles, such as the celibate religious life, court roles –
jester, musician, page, knight, and loyal squire – cowboys, sailors,
firemen, cross-country truck drivers, detectives, pilots had a prestige
all their own: there was no stigma attached to being professionally
single. Unfortunately, these roles seldom were open to women. Most
single female roles (such as spinster aunt, nun, or courtesan) were
still defined by their sexual nature.

Many social scientists are now proposing as a solution to the population
problem the encouragement of ‘deviant life styles’ that by definition
imply nonfertility. Richard Meier suggests that glamorous single
professions previously assigned only to men should now be opened to
women as well, for example, ‘astronaut’. He notes that where these
occupations exist for women, e.g., stewardess, they are based on the sex
appeal of a young woman, and thus can be only limited way stations on
the way to a better job or marriage. And, he adds, ‘so many limitations
are imposed \[on women’s work outside the home\] … that one suspects the
existence of a culture-wide conspiracy which makes the occupational role
sufficiently unpleasant that 90 per cent or more would choose homemaking
as a superior alternative’. With the extension of whatever single roles
still exist in our culture to include women, the creation of more such
roles, and a programme of incentives to make these professions
rewarding, we could, painlessly, reduce the number of people interested
in parenthood at all.

(2) ‘Living together.’ Practised at first only in Bohemian or
intellectual circles and now increasingly in the population at large –
especially by metropolitan youth – ‘living together’ is becoming a
common social practice. ‘Living together’ is the loose social form in
which two or more partners, of whatever sex, enter a non-legal
sex/companionate arrangement the duration of which varies with the
internal dynamics of the relationship. Their contract is only with each
other; society has no interest, since neither reproduction nor
production – dependencies of one party on the other – is involved. This
flexible non-form could be expanded to become the standard unit in which
most people would live for most of their lives.

At first, in the transitional period, sexual relationships would
probably be monogamous (single standard, female-style, this time
around), even if the couple chose to live with others. We might even see
the continuation of strictly non-sexual group living arrangements
(‘roommates’). However, after several generations of non-family living,
our psychosexual structures may become altered so radically that the
monogamous couple, or the ‘aim-inhibited’ relationship, would become
obsolescent. We can only guess what might replace it – perhaps true
‘group marriages’, trans-sexual group marriages which also involved
older children? We don’t know.

The two options we have suggested so far – single professions and
‘living together’ – already exist, but only outside the mainstream of
our society, or for brief periods in the life of the normal individual.
We want to broaden these options to include many more people for longer
periods of their lives, to transfer here instead all the cultural
incentives now supporting marriage – making these alternatives, finally,
as common and acceptable as marriage is today.

But what about children? Doesn’t everyone want children some time in
their lives? There is no denying that people now feel a genuine desire
to have children. But we don’t know how much of this is the product of
an authentic liking for children, and how much is a displacement of
other needs. We have seen that parental satisfaction is obtainable only
through crippling the child: the attempted extension of ego through
one’s children – in the case of the man, the ‘immortalizing’ of name,
property, class, and ethnic identification, and in the case of the
woman, motherhood as the justification of her existence, the resulting
attempt to live through the child, child-as-project – in the end damages
or destroys either the child or the parent, or both when neither wins,
as the case may be. Perhaps when we strip parenthood of these other
functions, we will find a real instinct for parenthood even on the part
of men, a simple physical desire to associate with the young. But then
we have lost nothing, for a basic demand of our alternative system is
some form of intimate interaction with children. If a parenthood
instinct does in fact exist, it will be allowed to operate even more
freely, having shed the practical burdens of parenthood that now make it
such an anguished hell.

But what, on the other hand, if we find that there is no parenthood
instinct after all? Perhaps all this time society has persuaded the
individual to have children only by imposing on parenthood ego concerns
that had no proper outlet. This may have been unavoidable in the past –
but perhaps it’s now time to start more directly satisfying those ego
needs. As long as natural reproduction is still necessary, we can devise
less destructive cultural inducements. But it is likely that, once the
ego investments in parenthood are removed, artificial reproduction will
be developed and widely accepted.

(3) Households. I shall now outline a system that I believe will satisfy
any remaining needs for children after ego concerns are no longer part
of our motivations. Suppose a person or a couple at some point in their
lives desire to live around children in a family-size unit. While we
will no longer have reproduction as the life goal of the normal
individual – we have seen how single and group non-reproductive life
styles could be enlarged to become satisfactory for many people for
their whole lifetimes and for others, for good portions of their
lifetime – certain people may still prefer community-style group living
permanently, and other people may want to experience it at some time in
their lives, especially during early childhood.

Thus at any given time a proportion of the population will want to live
in reproductive social structures. Correspondingly, the society in
general will still need reproduction, though reduced, if only to create
a new generation.

The proportion of the population will be automatically a select group
with a predictably higher rate of stability, because they will have had
a freedom of choice now generally unavailable. Today those who do not
marry and have children by a certain age are penalized: they find
themselves alone, excluded, and miserable, on the margins of a society
in which everyone else is compartmentalized into lifetime generational
families, chauvinism and exclusiveness their chief characteristic. (Only
in Manhattan is single living even tolerable, and that can be debated.)
Most people are still forced into marriage by family pressure, the
‘shotgun’, economic considerations, and other reasons that have nothing
to do with choice of life style. In our new reproductive unit, however,
with the limited contract (see below), child-rearing so diffused as to
be practically eliminated, economic considerations nonexistent, and all
participating members having entered only on the basis of personal
preference, ‘unstable’ reproductive social structures will have
disappeared.

This unit I shall call a household rather than an extended family. The
distinction is important: the word family implies biological
reproduction and some degree of division of labour by sex, and thus the
traditional dependencies and resulting power relations, extended over
generations; though the size of the family – in this case, the larger
numbers of the ‘extended’ family – may affect the strength of this
hierarchy, it does not change its structural definition. ‘Household’,
however, connotes only a large grouping of people living together for an
unspecified time, and with no specified set of interpersonal relations.

How would a ‘household’ operate?

Limited Contract. If the household replaced marriage perhaps we would at
first legalize it in the same way – if this is necessary at all. A group
of ten or so consenting adults of varying
ages[9](#part0017.html#chapter10-9) could apply for a licence as a group
in much the same way as a young couple today applies for a marriage
licence, perhaps even undergoing some form of ritual ceremony, and then
might proceed in the same way to set up house. The household licence
would, however, apply only for a given period, perhaps seven to ten
years, or whatever was decided on as the minimal time in which children
needed a stable structure in which to grow up – but probably a much
shorter period than we now imagine. If at the end of this period the
group decided to stay together, it could always get a renewal. However,
no single individual would be contracted to stay after this period, and
perhaps some members of the unit might transfer out, or new members come
in. Or, the unit could disband altogether.

There are many advantages to short-term households, stable compositional
units lasting for only about a decade: the end of family chauvinism,
built up over generations, of prejudices passed down from one generation
to the next, the inclusion of people of all ages in the child-rearing
process, the integration of many age groups into one social unit, the
breadth of personality that comes from exposure to many rather than to
(the idiosyncrasies of) a few, and so on.

Children. A regulated percentage of each household – say one third –
would be children. But whether, at first, genetic children created by
couples within the household, or at some future time – after a few
generations of household living had severed the special connection of
adults with ‘their’ children – children were produced artificially, or
adopted, would not matter: (minimal) responsibility for the early
physical dependence of children would be evenly diffused among all
members of the household.

But though it would still be structurally sound, we must be aware that
as long as we use natural childbirth methods, the ‘household’ could
never be a totally liberating social form. A mother who undergoes a
nine-month pregnancy is likely to feel that the product of all that pain
and discomfort ‘belongs’ to her (‘To think of what I went through to
have you!’). But we want to destroy this possessiveness along with its
cultural reinforcements so that no one child will be a priori favoured
over another, so that children will be loved for their own sake.

But what if there is an instinct for pregnancy? I doubt it. Once we have
sloughed off cultural superstructures, we may uncover a sex instinct,
the normal consequences of which lead to pregnancy. And perhaps there is
also an instinct to care for the young once they arrive. But an instinct
for pregnancy itself would be superfluous – could nature anticipate
humanity’s mastery of reproduction? And what if, once the false
motivations for pregnancy had been shed, women no longer wanted to
‘have’ children at all? Might this not be a disaster, given that
artificial reproduction is not yet perfected? But women have no special
reproductive obligation to the species. If they are no longer willing,
then artificial methods will have to be developed hurriedly, or, at the
very least, satisfactory compensations – other than destructive ego
investments – would have to be supplied to make it worth their while.

Adults and older children would take care of babies for as long as they
needed it, but since there would be many adults and older children
sharing the responsibility – as in the extended family – no one person
would ever be involuntarily stuck with it.

Adult/child relationships would develop just as do the best
relationships today: some adults might prefer certain children over
others, just as some children might prefer certain adults over others –
these might become lifelong attachments in which the individuals
concerned mutually agreed to stay together, perhaps to form some kind of
non-reproductive unit. Thus all relationships would be based on love
alone, uncorrupted by dependencies and resulting class inequalities.
Enduring relationships between people of widely divergent ages would
become common.

Legal Rights and Transfers. With the weakening and severance of the
blood ties, the power hierarchy of the family would break down. The
legal structure – as long as it is still necessary – would reflect this
democracy at the roots of our society. Women would be identical under
the law with men. Children would no longer be ‘minors’, under the
patronage of ‘parents’ – they would have full rights. Remaining physical
inequalities could be legally compensated for: for example, if a child
were beaten, perhaps he could report it to a special simplified
‘household’ court where he would be granted instant legal redress.

Another special right of children would be the right of immediate
transfer: if the child for any reason did not like the household into
which he had been born so arbitrarily, he would be helped to transfer
out. An adult on the other hand – one who had lived one span in a
household (seven to ten years) – might have to present his case to the
court, which would then decide, as do divorce courts today, whether he
had adequate grounds for breaking his contract. A certain number of
transfers within the seven-year period might be necessary for the smooth
functioning of the household, and would not be injurious to its
stability as a unit so long as a core remained. (In fact, new people now
and then might be a refreshing change.) However, the unit, for its own
best economy, might have to place a ceiling on the number of transfers
in or out, to avoid depletion, excessive growth, and/or friction.

Chores. As for housework: the larger family-sized group (twelve to
fifteen people) would be more practical – the waste and repetition of
the duplicate nuclear family unit would be avoided, e.g., as in shopping
or cooking for three or four people, without the loss of intimacy of the
larger communal experiment. In the interim, any housework would have to
be rotated equitably; but eventually cybernation would take care of most
domestic chores.

City Planning. City planning, architecture, furnishings, all would be
altered to reflect the new social structure. The trend towards
mass-produced housing would probably continue, but the housing might be
designed and even built (perhaps out of prefabricated components) by the
people living there to suit their own needs and tastes. Privacy could be
built in: either through private rooms in every household, or with
‘retreats’ within the larger city to be shared by people of other
households, or both. The whole might form a complex the size of a small
town or a large campus. Perhaps campus is the clearer image: we could
have small units of self-determined housing – prefabricated component
parts set up or dismantled easily and quickly to suit the needs of the
limited contract – as well as central permanent buildings to fill the
needs of the community as a whole, i.e. perhaps the equivalent of a
‘student union’ for socializing, restaurants, a large computer bank, a
modern communications centre, a computerized library and film centre,
‘learning centres’ devoted to various specialized interests, and
whatever else might be necessary in a cybernetic community.

The Economy. The end of the family would require corresponding changes
in the larger economy. Not only would reproduction be qualitatively
different, so would production: just as we have had to purify the
relation to children of all considerations of need we would first have
to have, to be entirely successful in our goals, the socialism of a
cybernetic economy, aiming first to redistribute drudgery equitably, but
eventually to eliminate it altogether. With the further development and
wise use of machines, people could be freed from toil, ‘work’ divorced
from wages and redefined: now adults as well as children could indulge
in serious ‘play’ as much as they wanted.

In the socialist transition, while we still had a money economy, people
might receive a guaranteed annual income from the state to take care of
basic physical needs. These incomes, if distributed equitably to men,
women, and children, regardless of age, work, prestige, birth, could in
themselves equalize in one blow the economic class system.

Activity. What would people do in this utopia? I don’t think that will
present a problem. If we truly had abolished all unpleasant work, people
would have the time and the energy to develop healthy interests of their
own. What is now found only among the élite, the pursuit of specialized
interests for their own sake, would probably become the norm.

As for our educational institutions: the irrelevancy of the school
system practically guarantees its breakdown in the near future. Perhaps
we could replace it with non-compulsory ‘learning centres,’ which would
combine both the minimally necessary functions of our elementary
educational institutions, the teaching of rudimentary skills, with those
of the higher, the expansion of knowledge, including everyone of any age
or level, children and adults.

Yes, but what about basic skills? How, for example, could a child with
no formal sequential training enter an advanced curriculum like
architecture? But traditional book learning, the memorizing of facts,
which forms the most substantial portion of the curriculum of our
elementary schools, will be radically altered under the impact of
cybernetics – a qualitative difference, to the apparatus of culture at
least as significant a change as was the printing press, even as
important as the alphabet. McLuhan pointed out the beginning of a
reversal from literary to visual means of absorbing knowledge. We can
expect the escalation of this and other effects with the further
development of modern media for the rapid transmittal of information.
And the amount of rote knowledge necessary either for children or adults
will itself be vastly reduced, for we shall have computer banks within
easy reach. After all, why store facts in one’s head when computer banks
could supply more comprehensive information instantaneously? (Already
yesterday’s children wondered why they must learn multiplication tables
rather than the operation of an adding machine.) Whatever mental storing
of basic facts is still necessary can be quickly accomplished through
new mechanical methods, teaching machines, records and tapes, and so on,
which, when they become readily available, would allow the abolition of
compulsory schooling for basic skills. Like foreign students in the
pursuit of a specialized profession, the child can pick up any necessary
basic ‘language’ on the side, through these supplementary machine
methods. But it is more likely that the fundamental skills and knowledge
necessary will be the same for adults as for children: skill in
operating new machines. Programming skills may become universally
required, but rather than through years of nine-to-five memorizing, they
could be absorbed instantly, only when required by a specific
discipline.

As for ‘career indecision’: those people today whose initial ‘hobby’ has
survived intact from childhood to become their adult ‘profession’ will
most often tell you they developed it before the age of
nine.[10](#part0017.html#chapter10-10) As long as specialized
professions still existed, they could be changed as often as adults
change majors or professions today. But if choice of profession had no
superimposed motives, if they were based only on interest in the subject
itself, switches in mid-course would probably be far fewer. Inability to
develop strong interests is today mostly the result of the corruption of
culture and its institutions.

Thus the new conception of work and education would resemble the
medieval system of apprenticeship, people of all ages participating at
all levels. As in academia today, the internal dynamics of the various
disciplines would foster their own social organization, providing a
means for meeting other people of like interests, and of sharing the
intellectual and aesthetic pursuits now available only to a select few,
the intelligentsia. The kind of social environment now found only in the
best departments of the best colleges might become the life style of the
masses, freed to develop their potential from the start: Whereas now
only the lucky or persevering ones ever arrive at (usually only
professing to) ‘doing their thing’, then everyone would have the
opportunity to develop to his/her full potential.

Or not develop if she so chose – but this seems unlikely, since every
child at first exhibits curiosity about people, things, the world in
general and what makes it tick. It is only because unpleasant reality
dampens his curiosity that the child learns to scale down his interests,
thus becoming the average bland adult. But if we should remove these
obstructions, then all people would develop as fully as only the
greatest and wealthiest classes, and a few isolated ‘geniuses’, have
been able to. Each individual would contribute to the society as a
whole, not for wages or other incentives of prestige and power, but
because the work he chose to do interested him in itself, and perhaps
only incidentally because it had a social value for others (as healthily
selfish as is only Art today). Work that had only social value and no
personal value would have been eliminated by the machine.

\*   \*   \*

Thus, in the larger context of a cybernetic communism, the establishment
of the household as the alternative to the family for reproduction of
children, combined with every imaginable life style for those who chose
to live singly or in non-reproductive units, would resolve all the basic
dilemmas that now arise from the family to obstruct human happiness. Let
us go over our four minimal demands to see how our imaginary
construction would fare.

(1) The freeing of women from the tyranny of reproduction by every means
possible, and the diffusion of child-rearing to the society as a whole,
to men and other children as well as women. This has been corrected.
Child-bearing could be taken over by technology, and if this proved too
much against our past tradition and psychic structure (as it certainly
would at first) then adequate incentives and compensations would have to
be developed – other than the ego rewards of possessing the child – to
reward women for their special social contribution of pregnancy and
childbirth. Most of child-rearing, as we have seen, has to do with the
maintaining of power relations, forced internalization of family values,
and many other ego concerns that war with the happiness of the
individual child. This repressive socialization process would now be
unnecessary in a society in which the interests of the individual
coincided with those of the larger society. Any child-rearing
responsibility left would be diffused to include men and other children
equally with women. In addition, new methods of instant communication
would lessen the child’s reliance on even this egalitarian primary unit.

(2) The economic independence and self-determination of all. Under a
cybernetic communism, even during the socialist transition, work would
be divorced from wages, the ownership of the means of production in the
hands of all the people, and wealth distributed on the basis of need,
independent of the social value of the individual’s contribution to
society. We would aim to eliminate the dependence of women and children
on the labour of men, as well as all other types of labour exploitation.
Each person could choose his life style freely, changing it to suit his
tastes without seriously inconveniencing anyone else; no one would be
bound into any social structure against his will, for each person would
be totally self-governing as soon as she was physically able.

(3) The complete integration of women and children into the larger
society. Fulfilled: the concept of childhood has been abolished,
children having full political, economic, and sexual rights, their
educational/work activities no different from those of adults. During
the few years of their infancy we have replaced the psychologically
destructive genetic ‘parenthood’ of one or two arbitrary adults with a
diffusion of the responsibility for physical welfare over a larger
number of people. The child would still form intimate love
relationships, but instead of developing close ties with a decreed
‘mother’ and ‘father’, the child might now form those ties with people
of his own choosing, of whatever age or sex. Thus all adult-child
relationships will have been mutually chosen – equal, intimate
relationships free of material dependencies. Correspondingly, though
children would be fewer, they would not be monopolized, but would mingle
freely throughout the society to the benefit of all, thus satisfying
that legitimate curiosity about the young which is often called the
reproductive ‘instinct’.

(4) Sexual freedom, love, etc. So far we have not said much of love and
sexual freedom because there is no reason for it to present a problem:
there would be nothing obstructing it. With full liberty human
relationships eventually would be redefined for the better. If a child
does not know his own mother or at least does not attach a special value
to her over others it is unlikely that he would choose her as his first
love object, only to have to develop inhibitions on this love. It is
possible that the child might form his first close physical
relationships with people his own size out of sheer physical
convenience, just as men and women, all else being equal, might prefer
each other over those of the same sex for sheer physical fit. But if
not, if he should choose to relate sexuality to adults, even if he
should happen to pick his own genetic mother, there would be no a priori
reasons for her to reject his sexual advances, because the incest taboo
would have lost its function. The ‘household’, a transient social form,
would not be subject to the dangers of inbreeding.

Thus, without the incest taboo, adults might return within a few
generations to a more natural polymorphous sexuality, the concentration
on genital sex and orgasmic pleasure giving way to total
physical/emotional relationships that included that. Relations with
children would include as much genital sex as the child was capable of –
probably considerably more than we now believe – but because genital sex
would no longer be the central focus of the relationship, lack of orgasm
would not present a serious problem. Age-ist and homosexual sex taboos
would disappear, as well as non-sexual friendship (Freud’s
‘aim-inhibited’ love). All close relationships would include the
physical, our concept of exclusive physical partnerships (monogamy)
disappearing from our psychic structure, as well as the construct of a
Lover Ideal. But how long it would take for these changes to occur, and
in what forms they would appear, remains conjecture. The specifics need
not concern us here. We need only set up the preconditions for a free
sexuality: whatever forms it took would be assuredly an improvement on
what we have now, ‘natural’ in the truest sense.

In the transitional phase, adult genital sex and the exclusiveness of
couples within the household might have to be maintained in order for
the unit to be able to function smoothly, with a minimum of internal
tension caused by sexual frictions. It is unrealistic to impose theories
of what ought to be on a psyche already fundamentally organized around
specific emotional needs. And this is why individual attempts to
eliminate sexual possessiveness are now always inauthentic. We would do
much better to concentrate on overthrowing the institutions that have
produced this psychical organization, making possible the eventual – if
not in our lifetime – fundamental restructuring (or should I say
destructuring?) of our psychosexuality.

Above, I have drawn up only a very rough plan in order to make the
general direction of a feminist revolution more vivid: reproduction and
production would both be, simultaneously, reorganized in a
non-repressive way. The birth of children to a unit which disbanded or
recomposed as soon as children were physically independent, one that was
meant to serve immediate needs rather than to pass on power and
privilege (the basis of patriarchy is the inheritance of property gained
through labour) would eliminate the psychology of power, sexual
repression, and cultural sublimation. Family chauvinism, class privilege
based on birth, would wither away. The blood tie of the mother to the
child would eventually be severed – if male jealousy of ‘creative’
childbirth actually exists, we shall soon have the means to create life
independently of sex – so that pregnancy, now freely acknowledged as
clumsy, inefficient, and painful, would be indulged in, if at all, only
as a tongue-in-cheek archaism, just as already women today wear virginal
white to their weddings. A cybernetic communism would abolish economic
classes, and all forms of labour exploitation, by granting all people a
livelihood based only on material needs. Eventually work (drudge jobs)
would be eliminated in favour of (complex) play, activity done for its
own sake, by adults as well as children. With the disappearance of
motherhood, and the obstructing incest taboo, sexuality would be
re-integrated, allowing love to flow unimpeded.

Notes

1. The Dialectic of Sex

[1](#part0007.html#cha-1). His correlation of the interdevelopment of
these two systems in Origin of the Family, Private Property and the
State on a time scale might read as follows:

![image](images/00006.jpeg)

2. On American Feminism

[1](#part0008.html#cha-1). For example, witches must be seen as women in
independent political revolt: within two centuries eight million women
were burned at the stake by the Church–for religion was the politics of
that period.

[2](#part0008.html#cha-2). Hereafter abbreviated WRM.

[3](#part0008.html#cha-3). The Woman’s Party struggled on through a
depression and several wars, campaigning for the next big legal boost to
women’s freedom, an Equal Rights Amendment to the Constitution. Fifty
years later those who are still alive are still campaigning. The
stereotype of the crotchety old lady with her umbrella, obsessed with a
cause already won, is the ‘comic’ product of the ossification of
feminism created by the Fifty-Year Ridicule.

[4](#part0008.html#cha-4). ‘Liberation’ as opposed to ‘emancipation’ to
denote freedom from sexual classification altogether rather than merely
an equalizing of sex roles. Nevertheless, I have always found the name
heavy, too flavoured with New Left rhetoric, and ashamed to acknowledge
any relation to feminism. I prefer to use ‘radical feminism’.

3. Freudianism: The Misguided Feminism

[1](#part0009.html#cha-1). R. P. Knight in ‘Evaluation of the Results of
Psychoanalytic Therapy’, American Journal of Psychiatry, 1941, found
that psychoanalysis was a failure with 56.7 per cent of the patients he
studied, and a success with only 43.3 per cent. Thus psychoanalysis
failed somewhat more often than it succeeded. In 1952 in a different
study Eysenck showed an improvement rate in patients who had received
psychoanalysis of 44 per cent; in patients who had received
psychotherapy of 64 per cent; and in those who had received no treatment
at all an improvement rate of 72 per cent. Other studies (Barron and
Leary, 1955; Bergin, 1963; Cartwright and Vogel, 1960;Truax, 1963;
Powers and Witmer, 1951) confirm these negative results.

[2](#part0009.html#cha-2). If I deal with the male child before the
female that is because Freud – indeed our whole culture – deals with the
male child first. Even in order properly to criticize Freud we shall
have to follow the priorities he has set up in his own work. Also, as
Freud himself saw, the Oedipus Complex had much greater cultural
significance than the Electra; I too shall attempt to show that indeed
it is more psychologically damaging, if only because in a male-dominated
culture the damage done to the male psyche has vaster consequences.

[3](#part0009.html#cha-3). A booming doll business capitalizes on this
parental anxiety. As for the kid, she likes presents, whatever the
obscure reasoning of adult minds. Though once they realize what the
dolls are for, many sharp little girls hastily decide they want a
different kind of toy, or at least a ‘Barbie’ doll; after all, they’d
rather sharpen their weapons against ‘Ken’ than play already-conquered
Mama.

4. Down with Childhood

[1](#part0010.html#cha-1). The misery of the goddess has been portrayed
admirably in Satyajit Ray’s film Devi.

[2](#part0010.html#cha-2). In the orthodox Jewish milieu in which I grew
up, considered anachronistic by outsiders, many little boys still begin
serious study before the age of five, and as a result Talmudic prodigies
are common.

[3](#part0010.html#cha-3). This is carried to extremes in contemporary
public schools where perfectly ready children are turned away for a
whole year because their birthdays fall a few days short of an arbitrary
date.

[4](#part0010.html#cha-4). See Ariès, Centuries of Childhood: A Social
History of Family Life, Ch. V, ‘From Immodesty to Innocence’, for a
detailed description of this exposure, based on the sexual experiences
of the Dauphin as recorded in the Heroard Journal.

[5](#part0010.html#cha-5). Gangs are the only modern children’s groups
that are self-directed: the term gang has an ominous sound for good
political reasons.

5. Racism: The Sexism of the Family of Man

[1](#part0011.html#cha-1). In 1969, white men who worked full-time the
year around earned a median income of $6,497; black men, $4,285; white
women, $3,859; and black women, $2,674.

But in only a few radical circles affected by the Women’s Liberation
Movement has even the black woman been acknowledged to be at the bottom
economically.

[2](#part0011.html#cha-2). I shall deal here only with the domestic race
relations with which I am most familiar, though I have no doubt that the
same metaphor could be applied equally well to international and Third
World politics.

[3](#part0011.html#cha-3) An interesting illustration of their common
and interchangeable political function is the psychological substitution
of the racial caste distinction for the sexual caste distinction, e.g.,
a black lesbian often automatically assumes the male role in a
black-white lesbian relationship.

[4](#part0011.html#cha-4). Here, and throughout the chapter, I am
assuming the position of the Black Panther Party as representative of
Black Power, though I am well aware that the BPP has violent disputes
with other Black Power groups over many things.

6. Love

[1](#part0012.html#cha-1). Thus the peculiar situation that women never
object to the insulting of women as a class, as long as they
individually are excepted. The worst insult for a woman is that she is
‘just like a woman’, i.e. no better; the highest compliment that she has
the brains, talent, dignity, or strength of a man. In fact, like every
member of an oppressed class, she herself participates in the insulting
of others like herself, hoping thereby to make it obvious that she as an
individual is above their behaviour. Thus women as a class are set
against each other \[‘Divide and Conquer’\], the ‘other woman’ believing
that the wife is a ‘bitch’ who ‘doesn’t understand him’, and the wife
believing that the other woman is an ‘opportunist’ who is ‘taking
advantage’ of him – while the culprit himself sneaks away free.

7. The Culture of Romance

[1](#part0013.html#cha-1). Gallantry has been commonly defined as
‘excessive attention to women without serious purpose’, but the purpose
is very serious: through a false flattery, to keep women from awareness
of their lower-class condition.

[2](#part0013.html#cha-2). But as every woman has discovered, a man who
seems to be pressuring for sex is often greatly relieved to be excused
from the literal performance: his ego has been made dependent on his
continuously proving himself through sexual conquest; but all he may
have really wanted was the excuse to indulge in affection without the
loss of manly self-respect. That men are more restrained than are women
about exhibiting emotion is because, in addition to the results of the
Oedipus Complex, to express tenderness to a woman is to acknowledge her
equality. Unless, of course, one tempers one’s tenderness – takes it
back – with some evidence of domination.

[3](#part0013.html#cha-3). Homosexuals are so ridiculed because in
viewing the male as sex object they go doubly against the norm: even
women don’t read Pretty Boy magazines.

[4](#part0013.html#cha-4). ‘As for his other sports,’ says a recent
blurb about football hero Joe Namath, ‘he prefers Blondes.’

8. (Male) Culture

[1](#part0014.html#cha-1). Female inability to focus on sexual imagery
has been found to be a major cause of female frigidity. Masters and
Johnson, Albert Ellis, and others have stressed the importance of
‘sexual focusing’ in teaching frigid women to achieve orgasm. Hilda
O’Hare in International Journal of Sexology correctly attributes this
problem to the absence in our society of a female counterpart for the
countless stimulants of the male sexual urge.

[2](#part0014.html#cha-2). However, women’s presence in the arts and
humanities is still viciously fought by the few males remaining, in
proportion to the insecurity of their own position – particularly
precarious in traditional, humanist schools, such as figurative
painting.

9. Dialectics of Cultural History

[1](#part0015.html#cha-1). I was struck by this at a recent women’s
liberation workshop scheduled by the science department of a top-level
eastern university: of the fifty women present, only one or two were
engaged in research, let alone high-level research. The others were lab
technicians, graduate assistants, high school science teachers, faculty
wives, and the like.

[2](#part0015.html#cha-2). The idealistic mode, corresponding roughly to
the suprahistorical, non-materialist ‘metaphysical’ mode of thought
against which Marx and Engels revolted.

[3](#part0015.html#cha-3). Revolutionaries, by definition, are still
visionaries of the aesthetic mode, the idealists of pragmatic politics.

[4](#part0015.html#cha-4). Recent attempts of the youth hippie drug
culture to return to this state of simplicity—even if one turns into a
‘head’ by artificial means of chemical stimulation—are bound to fail.
People have developed layers of repression and defenses only because
they must to live in our current real world. One now can achieve at best
a (mannered and self-conscious) ‘direct experience’ only by ‘dropping
out,’ ignoring the real world, for example, moving to Colorado (circa
1878) with people of like mind, and hoping hard they won’t bother
bombing out there. This is naïve—and reactionary, regressive,
ahistorical, utopian, etc.—but above all, it is ineffective.

10. The Ultimate Revolution: Demands and Speculations

[1](#part0016.html#cha-1). This chapter was written before the ‘Pill
Hearings’, indeed before the mushrooming of the ecology movement itself.
Such is the speed of modern communications – a book is outdated before
it even makes it into galleys.

[2](#part0016.html#cha-2). Though it is true that children in orphanages
do not get even the warmth and attention that parents give a child, with
crippling results – tests have shown IQ’s of children in institutions to
be lower, emotional maladjustment higher, and even, as in the famous
experiment with monkeys deprived of motherly care, sexual functioning to
be crippled or destroyed – those who quote these statistics so
triumphantly to discredit radical alternatives do not recognize that the
orphanage is the antithesis of a radical alternative, that in fact it is
an outgrowth of what we are trying to correct.

The orphanage is the underside of the family, just as prostitution is
the direct result of the institution of patriarchal marriage. In the
same sense as prostitution complements marriage, the orphanage is the
necessary complementary evil of a society in which the majority of
children live under a system of patronage by genetic parents. In the one
case, because women exist under patronage, unclaimed women pay a special
price; in the other, because children are possessions of specific
individuals rather than free members of the society, unclaimed children
suffer.

Orphans are those unfortunate children who have no parents at all in a
society that dictates that all children must have parents to survive.
When all adults are monopolized by their genetic children, there is no
one left to care about the unclaimed. However, if no one had exclusive
relationships with children, then everyone would be free for all
children. The natural interest in children would be diffused over all
children rather than narrowly concentrated on one’s own.

The evils of this orphanage system, the barracks-like existence, the
impersonality, the anonymity, arise because these institutions are
dumping grounds for the rejected in an exclusive family system; whereas
we want to spread family emotions over the whole society. Thus child
institutions and their consequences are at the furthest remove from
revolutionary alternatives because they violate almost all of our
essential postulates: the integration of children into the total
society, and the granting of full economic and sexual freedoms.

[3](#part0016.html#cha-3). Neill says of himself: ‘Although I write and
say what I think of society, if I tried to reform society by action,
society would kill me as a public danger.… \[I realize\] that my primary
job is not the reformation of society, but the bringing of happiness to
some few children.’

[4](#part0016.html#cha-4). Indeed, Neill and his wife Ena act as the
role models, though for a rather extended family. Neill, baffled but
nevertheless accepting comments on the recurrence of sex roles:

 

On a good day you may not see the boy gangsters \[?\] of Summerhill.
They are in far corners intent on their deeds of derring-do. But you
will see the girls. They are in or near the house, and never far away
from the grown-ups.

You will often find the Art Room full of girls painting and making
things with fabrics. In the main, however, I think that the small boys
are more creative; at least I never hear a boy say he is bored because
he doesn’t know what to do, whereas I sometimes hear girls say that.

Possibly I find the boys more creative than the girls because the school
may be better equipped for boys than for girls. Girls of ten or over
have little use for a workshop with iron and wood … They have their art
work, which includes pottery, cutting linoleum blocks and painting, and
sewing work, but for some that is not enough …

The girls take a less active part in school meetings than the boys do,
and I have no ready explanation for this fact.’ (Italics mine)

 

[5](#part0016.html#cha-5). If the isolated Summerhill school experiment
works to a limited degree the Summerhill ‘home’ fails resoundingly.
There is nothing as sad as the spectacle of parents trying to initiate
their own private version of Summerhill into their family life, never
realizing the deep contradiction between the nuclear family and true
child freedom. I have been in homes in which mothers were reduced to
begging children to stop hitting guests (me) – they didn’t dare use the
power that the child, at least, knows is there and, in fact, is
provoking; there are other families where children are dragged off to
family councils periodically; and so on. But nevertheless, despite all
these progressive measures, children instinctively know – and act on
this knowledge – that any real decisions will be controlled by the
parents, who hold the power.

[6](#part0016.html#cha-6). Wilhelm Reich discusses the Russian inability
to handle the first signs of a free child sexuality: child sex was
interpreted in Puritan terms as the sign of moral breakdown, rather than
as the first stage of the reversion to a natural sexuality.

[7](#part0016.html#cha-7). Ninety-five per cent of all American women
still marry and 90 per cent bear children, most often more than two.
Families with children in the median range (two to four) still
predominate, no longer attributable to the postwar baby boom.

[8](#part0016.html#cha-8). But what does this dichotomy good/bad really
mean? Perhaps after all, it is only a euphemistic class distinction:
sensitive and open, as opposed to harassed and stultified, But even
though a child born to educated or upper-class parents is luckier in
every respect, and is apt to receive a fair number of privileges by
virtue of his class, name, and the property he is due to inherit,
children are born equal among all classes – if indeed children born to
the unfortunate do not outnumber the others – in this way reproducing in
exact proportions the original inequality.

[9](#part0016.html#cha-9). An added advantage of the household is that
it allows older people past their fertile years to share fully in
parenthood when they so desire.

[10](#part0016.html#cha-10). If children today were given a realistic
idea of the professions available – not just fireman/nurse – they might
arrive at a special interest even sooner.

 

PRAISE FOR

The Dialectic of Sex

THEN …

“A nuggetty book … stronger and more unanswerable than Sexual Politics.”

—Germaine Greer, Listener

“The Dialectic of Sex, true to the Marxist spirit, presents a utopia
that is not a visionary dream but a concrete diagram of the future … The
obituary for power psychology in all its forms is ready and waiting.”

—Muriel Haynes, The New Republic

… AND NOW

“Although Gen X women like to fancy ourselves the ‘fresh-makers’ of
feminism, Shulamith Firestone reminds us that sisters were ‘keeping it
real’ long before that expression was even invented. These power-packed
chapters are live and direct, with a cultural shelf life that spans well
into our times.”

—Ophira Edut, editor, Body Outlaws: Young Women Write about Body Image
and Identity; founder and publisher, HUES magazine

“The Dialectic of Sex is a truly visionary work. Thirty years later,
many of Firestone’s ideas remain startlingly relevant, making Dialectic
essential reading not only for its value as feminist history but also
for its contribution to feminism’s future.”

—Lisa Miya-Jervis, editor and publisher, Bitch magazine

 

![image](images/00007.jpeg)

Shulamith Firestone

 

THE DIALECTIC OF SEX

SHULAMITH FIRESTONE was born in Ottawa, Canada, toward the end of World
War II. She grew up in the Midwest and attended Yavneh of Telshe
Yeshiva, Washington University, and the Art Institute of Chicago, from
which she received a bachelor of fine arts in painting. She was a
founder of the women’s liberation movement and editor of Notes, a
journal of radical feminism. She lives in New York City.

 

Farrar, Straus and Giroux

19 Union Square West, New York 10003

Copyright © 1970 by Shulamith Firestone

All rights reserved

Originally published in 1970 by William Morrow and Company, Inc.

First paperback edition published in 1971 by Bantam

First Farrar, Straus and Giroux edition, 2003

The Library of Congress has cataloged the hardcover edition as follows:

Firestone, Shulamith.

   The dialectic of sex : the case for feminist revolution / by
Shulamith Firestone.

     p.  cm.

   ISBN 0-688-12359-7

   1.  Feminist theory.   2.  Feminism—United States.   I.  Title.

HQ1190.F57 1993

305.42′01—dc20

92-24384

CIP

 

FSG paperback ISBN: 0-374-52787-3

[www.fsgbooks.com](http://www.fsgbooks.com)

eISBN 9781466833517

First eBook edition: October 2012
