

FOREWORD


_Real humanism_ has no more dangerous enemy in Germany than
_spiritualism_ or _speculative idealism_, which substitutes
_"self-consciousness"_ or the _''spirit"_ for the _real individual man_
and with the evangelist teaches: "It is the spirit that quickeneth; the
flesh profiteth nothing." Needless to say, this incorporeal spirit is
spiritual only in its imagination. What we are combating in _Bauer's_
criticism is precisely _speculation_ reproducing itself as a
_caricature._ We see in it the most complete expression of the
_Christian-Germanic_ principle, which makes its last effort by
transforming _"criticism"_ itself into a transcendent power.

Our exposition deals first and foremost with _Bruno Bauer's Allgemeine
Literatur-Zeitung_ -- the first eight numbers are here before us --
because in it Bauer's criticism, and with it the nonsense of _German
speculation in general,_ has reached its peak. The more completely
Critical Criticism (the criticism of the _Literatur-Zeitung)_ distorts
reality into an obvious comedy through philosophy, the more instructive
it is. -- For examples see _Faucher_ and _Szeliga._ -- The
_Literatur-Zeitung_ offers material by which even the broad public can
be enlightened on the illusions of speculative philosophy. That is the
aim of our book.

Our exposition is naturally determined by its _subject_. Critical
Criticism is in all respects _below_ the level already attained by
German theoretical development. The nature of our subject therefore
justifies our refraining _here_ from further _discussion_ of that
development itself.

Critical Criticism makes it necessary rather to assert, in contrast to
it, the already achieved results _as such_.

We therefore give this polemic as a preliminary to the independent works
in which we -- each of us for himself, of course -- shall present our
positive view and thereby our positive attitude to the more recent
philosophical anti social doctrines.

Paris, September 1844

Engels, Marx

Chapter I “Critical Criticism in the Form of a Master-Bookbinder”, Or Critical Criticism As Herr Reichardt

Critical Criticism, however superior to the mass it deems itself,
nevertheless has boundless pity for the mass. And Criticism so loved the
mass that it sent its only begotten son, that all who believe in him may
not be lost, but may have Critical life. Criticism was made mass and
dwells amongst us and we behold its glory, the glory of the only
begotten son of the father. In other words, Criticism becomes
socialistic and speaks of "works on pauperism". It does not regard it as
a crime to be equal to God but alienates itself and takes the form of a
master-bookbinder and humiliates itself to the extent of nonsense —
indeed even to Critical nonsense in foreign languages. It, whose
heavenly virginal purity shrinks from contact with the sinful leprous
mass, overcomes itself to the extent of taking notice of "_Bodz"_ and
"_all_ original writers on pauperism" and "has for years been following
this evil of the present time step by step"; it scorns writing for
experts, it writes for the general public, banning all outlandish
expressions, all "Latin intricacies, all professional jargon". It bans
all that from the works of _others,_ for it would be too much to expect
Criticism itself to submit to "this administrative regulation". And yet
it does do so partly, renouncing with admirable ease, if not the words
themselves, at least their content. And who will reproach it for using
"the huge heap of unintelligible foreign words'' when it repeatedly
proves that it does not understand those words itself, Here are a few
samples:

“That is why the _institutions of mendicancy_ inspire them with horror."

“A doctrine of responsibility in which every motion _of human thought
becomes an image of Lot's wife."_

“On the keystone of this really _profound edifice of art."_

“This is the main content of Stein's political testament, which the
great statesman handed in even before retiring from the active service
of the government and from all its transactions."

“This people had _not yet any dimensions_ at that time for such
extensive freedom."

“By _palavering_ with fair assurance at the end of his publicistic work
that only confidence was still lacking."

“To the manly state-elevating understanding, rising above routine and
pusillanimous fear, reared on history and nurtured with a live
perception of foreign public state system."

“The education of general national welfare."

“Freedom lay dead in the _breast of the Prussian national mission_ under
the control of the authorities."

“_Popular-organic_ publicism."

“The people to whom even Herr Brüggemann delivers the _baptismal
certificate of its adulthood."_

“A rather glaring contradiction to the other _certitudes_ which are
expressed in the work on the professional capacities of the people."

“Wretched self-interest quickly dispels all the _chimeras of the
national will."_

“Passion for great gains, etc., was the spirit that pervaded the whole
of the Restoration period and which, with a _fair quantity of
indifference, adhered_ to the new age."

“The obscure idea of political significance to be found in the _Prussian
countrymanship nationality rests on the memory of a great history."_

“The antipathy disappeared and turned into a completely exalted
condition."

“In this wonderful transition each one in his own way still _put forward
in prospect_ his own special _wish_."

“A catechism with unctuous Solomon-like language the words of which rise
gently like a dove — chirp! chirp! — to the regions of pathos and
_thunder-like aspects."_

“All the _dilettantism of thirty-five years of neglect."_

“The _too sharp thundering_ at the citizens by one of their former town
authorities could have been suffered with the calmness of mind
characteristic of our representatives if Benda's view of the Town
Charter of 1808 had not laboured under a _Mussulman conceptual
affliction_ with regard to the essence and the application of the Town
Charter."

In Herr Reichardt, the audacity of style always corresponds to the
audacity of the thought. He makes transitions like the following:

“Herr Brüggemann ... 1843 ... state theory ... every upright man ... the
great modesty of our Socialists ... natural marvels ... demands to be
made on Germany ... supernatural marvels ... Abraham ... Philadelphia
... manna ... baker ... but _since_ we are speaking of _marvels,
Napoleon_ brought," etc.

After these samples it is no wonder that Critical Criticism gives us a
further "explanation" of a sentence which it itself describes as
expressed in "popular language", for it "arms its eyes with organic
power to penetrate chaos". And here it must be said that then even
"popular language" cannot remain unintelligible to Critical Criticism.
It is aware that the way of the writer must necessarily be a crooked one
if the individual who sets out on it is not strong enough to make it
straight; and therefore it naturally ascribes "mathematical operations"
to the author.

It is self-evident — and history, which proves everything which is
self-evident, also proves this — that Criticism does not become mass in
order to remain mass, but in order to redeem the mass from its mass-like
mass nature, that is, to raise the popular language of the mass to the
critical language of Critical Criticism. It is the lowest grade of
degradation for Criticism to learn the popular language of the mass and
transfigure that vulgar jargon into the high-flown intricacy of the
dialectics of Critical Criticism.

Chapter II “Critical Criticism” As a ‘Mill-Owner’, Or Critical Criticism As Herr Jules Faucher

After rendering most substantial services to self-consciousness by
humiliating itself to the extent of nonsense in foreign languages, and
thereby at the same time freeing the world from pauperism, Criticism
still further humiliates itself to the extent of _nonsense_ in
_practice_ and _history_. It masters "_English questions of the day_"
and gives us a genuinely _critical outline of the history of English
industry._

Criticism, which is self-sufficient, and complete and perfect in itself,
naturally cannot recognise history as it really took place, for that
would mean recognising the base mass in all its mass-like mass nature,
whereas the problem is precisely to redeem the mass from its mass
nature. History is therefore freed from its mass nature, and Criticism,
which has a free attitude to its object, calls to history: "_You ought
to have happened in such and such a way!"_ All the laws of Criticism
have _retrospective_ force: _prior to_ the decrees of Criticism, history
behaved quite differently from how it did _after_ them. Hence mass-type
history, so-called _real_ history, deviates considerably from Critical
history, as it takes place in Heft VII of the _Literatur-Zeitung_ from
page 4 onwards.

In mass-type history there were _no factory towns_ before there were
_factories_; but in Critical history, in which, as already in _Hegel_,
the son begets his father, _Manchester, Bolton_ and _Preston_ were
flourishing factory towns before factories were even thought of. In real
history the _cotton industry_ was founded mainly on _Hargreaves' jenny_
and _Arkwright's throstle, Crompton's mule_ being only an improvement of
the spinning jenny according to the new principle discovered by
Arkwright. But Critical history knows how to make distinctions: it
scorns the one-sidedness of the jenny and the throstle, and gives the
crown to the mule as the speculative identity of the extremes. In
reality, the invention of the throstle and the mule immediately made
possible the _application of water-power_ to those machines, but
Critical Criticism sorts out the principles lumped together by crude
history and makes this application come only later, as something quite
special. In reality the invention of the steam-engine _preceded_ all the
above-mentioned inventions; according to Criticism it is the crown of
them all and the _last._

In reality the _business_ ties between Liverpool and Manchester in their
present scope were the result of the export of English goods; according
to Criticism they are the _cause_ of the export and both are the result
of the proximity of the two towns. In reality nearly all goods from
Manchester go to the Continent via _Hull_,according to Criticism via
_Liverpool._

In reality all _grades of wages_ exist in English factories, from Is 6d
to 40s and more; but according to Criticism only one rate is paid — 11s.
In reality the _machine_ replaces _manual labour_; according to
Criticism it replaces _thought_. In reality the association of workers
for wage rises is allowed in _England,_ but according to Criticism it is
prohibited, for when the Mass wants to allow itself anything it must
first ask Criticism. In reality _factory labour_ is extremely _tiring_
and gives rise to specific diseases — there are even special medical
works on them; according to Criticism "excessive exertion cannot be a
hindrance to work, for the power is provided by the machine". In reality
the machine is a machine; according to Criticism it has a will, for as
it does not rest, neither can the worker, and he is subordinated to an
alien will.

But that is still nothing at all. Criticism cannot be content with the
_mass-type parties_ in England; it creates new ones, including a
"_factory party"_, for which history may be thankful to it. On the other
hand, it lumps together the factory-owners and the factory workers in
one massive heap — why bother about such trifles! — and decrees that the
factory workers refused to contribute to the Anti-Corn-Law Leagues not
out of ill-will or because of Chartism, as the stupid factory-owners
maintain, but merely because they were poor. It further decrees that
with the repeal of the English Corn Laws agricultural labourers will
have to put up with a lowering of wages, in regard to which, however, we
must most submissively remark that that destitute class cannot be
deprived of another penny without being reduced to absolute starvation.
It decrees that the working day in English factories is sixteen hours,
although a silly un-Critical English law has fixed a maximum of twelve
hours. It decrees that England is to become a huge workshop for the
world, although the un-Critical mass of Americans, Germans and Belgians
are ruining one market after another for the English by their
competition. Lastly, it decrees that neither the propertied nor the
non-propertied classes in England are aware of the _centralisation of
property_ and its consequences for the working classes, although the
stupid Chartists think they are well aware of them; the Socialists
maintain that they expounded those consequences in detail long ago, and
even Tories and Whigs like _Carlyle, Alison and Gaskell_ have proved
their knowledge of them in their works.

Criticism decrees that _Lord Ashley's Ten Hour Bill_ is a half-hearted
_juste-milieu_ measure and Lord Ashley himself "a true illustration of
constitutional action", while the factory-owners, the Chartists, the
landowners — in short, all that makes up the mass nature of England —
have so far considered this measure as an expression, the mildest
possible one admittedly, of a downright radical principle, since it
would lay the axe at the root of foreign trade and thereby at the root
of the factory system — nay, not merely lay the axe to it, but cut
deeply into it. Critical Criticism knows better. It knows that the ten
hour question was discussed before a "commission" of the Lower House,
although the un-Critical newspapers try to make us believe that this
"commission" was the _House itself, "a Committee of the Whole House"_ ;
but Criticism must needs do away with that eccentricity of the English
Constitution.

Critical Criticism, which itself _begets_ its _opposite_, the _stupidity
of the Mass,_ also produces the stupidity of Sir James Graham: by a
Critical understanding of the English language it puts things in his
mouth which the un-Critical Home Secretary never said, just to allow
Critical wisdom to shine brighter in comparison with his stupidity.
Graham, according to Criticism, says that the machines in the factories
wear out in about twelve years whether they work ten hours a day or
twelve, and that therefore a Ten Hour Bill would make it impossible for
the capitalists to reproduce in twelve years through the work of their
machines the capital laid out on them. Criticism proves that it has thus
put a false conclusion in the mouth of Sir James Graham, for a machine
that works one-sixth of the time less every day will naturally remain
usable longer.

However correct this observation of Critical Criticism against its own
false conclusion, it must, on the other hand, be conceded that Sir James
Graham said that under a Ten Hour Bill the machine would have to work
quicker in the proportion that its working time was reduced (Criticism
itself quotes this in [Heft] VIII, page 32) and that in that case the
time when it would be worn out would be the same — twelve years. This
must all the more be acknowledged as the acknowledgment contributes to
the glory and exaltation of "_Criticism_"; for only Criticism both made
the false conclusion and then refuted it. Criticism is just as
magnanimous towards Lord _John Russell_, to whom it imputes the wish to
change the political form of the state and the electoral system. From
this we must conclude either that Criticism's urge to produce
stupidities is uncommonly powerful or that Lord John Russell must have
become a Critical Critic within the past week.

But Criticism only becomes truly magnificent in its fabrication of
stupidities when it discovers that the English workers — who in April
and May held meeting after meeting, drew up petition after petition, and
all for the Ten Hour Bill, and displayed more agitation throughout the
factory districts than at any time during the past two years — that
those workers take only a "_partial_ interest" in this question,
although it is evident that "legislation limiting the working day has
also occupied their attention" Criticism is truly magnificent when it
finally makes the great, the glorious, the unheard-of discovery that

“the apparently more immediate help from the repeal of the Corn Laws
absorbs most of the wishes of the workers and will do so until no longer
doubtful realisation of those wishes practically proves the futility of
the repeal" —

proves it to workers who drag Anti-Corn-Law agitators down from the
platform at every public meeting, who have seen to it that the
Anti-Corn-Law League no longer dares to hold a public meeting in any
English industrial town, who consider the League to be their only enemy
and who, during the debate of the Ten Hour Bill — as nearly always
before in similar matters — had the support of the Tories. Criticism is
superb, too, when it discovers that "the workers still let themselves be
lured by the sweeping promises of the _Chartist movement"_, which is
nothing but the political expression of public opinion among the
workers. Criticism is superb, too, when it realises, in the depths of
its Absolute Spirit, that

“the two party groupings, the political one and that of the landowners
and mill-owners, _no longer_ wish to merge or coincide".

It was so far not known that the party grouping of the landowners and
the mill-owners, because of the numerical smallness of either class of
owners and the equal political rights of each (with the exception of the
few peers), was so comprehensive that it was completely identical with
the political party groupings, and not their most consistent expression,
their peak. Criticism is splendid when it suggests that the
Anti-Corn-Law Leaguers do not know that, _ceteris paribus_, a drop in
the price of bread must be followed by a drop in wages, so that all
would remain as it was; whereas these people expect that, granted there
is a drop in wages and a consequent lowering of production costs, the
result will be an expansion of the market. This, they expect, would lead
to a reduction of competition among the workers, and consequently wages
would still be kept a little higher in comparison with the price of
bread than they are now.

Freely creating its opposite — nonsense — and moving in artistic
rapture, Criticism, which only two years ago exclaimed "Criticism speaks
German, theology speaks Latin!", has now learnt _English_ and calls the
estate-owners "_Landeigner"_ (landowners), the factoryowners
"Mühleigner" (mill-owners) — in English a mill means any factory with
machinery driven by steam or water-power — and the workers _"Hände"_
(hands). Instead of "_Einmischung"_ it says _Interferenz_
(interference); and in its infinite mercy for the English language, the
sinful mass nature of which is abundantly evident, it condescends to
improve it by doing away with the pedantry with which the English place
the title "Sir" before the _Christian_ name of knights and baronets.
Where the Mass says "Sir James Graham", it says "Sir Graham".

That Criticism reforms _English_ history and the _English_ language out
of _principle_ and not out of levity will presently be provided by the
_thoroughness_ with which it treats the _history of Herr Nauwerck._

Chapter III “The Thoroughness of Critical Criticism”, Or Critical Criticism As Herr J. (Jungnitz?)

Criticism cannot ignore Herr _Nauwerck's_ infinitely important dispute
with the Berlin Faculty of Philosophy. It has indeed had a similar
experience and it must take Herr Nauwerck's fate as a background in
order to put its own _dismissal from Bonn_ in sharper relief. Criticism,
being accustomed to considering the Bonn affair as the event of the
century, and having already written the "philosophy of the deposition of
criticism", could be expected to give a similar detailed philosophical
construction of the Berlin "collision". Criticism proves _a priori_ that
everything had to happen in such a way and no other. It proves:

1) Why the Faculty of Philosophy was bound to come into "collision" not
with a logician or metaphysician, but with a philosopher of the state;
2) Why that collision could not be so sharp and decisive as Criticism's
conflict with theology in Bonn;
3) Why that collision was, properly speaking, a stupid business, since
Criticism had already concentrated all principles and all content in its
Bonn collision, so that world history could only become a plagiarist of
Criticism;
4) Why the Faculty of Philosophy considered attacks on the works of Herr
Nauwerck as attacks on itself;
5) Why no other course remained for Herr N, but to retire of his own
accord;
6) Why the Faculty had to defend Herr N. if it did not want to disavow
itself;
7) Why the "inner split in the Faculty had necessarily to manifest
itself in such a way" that the Faculty declared both N. and the
Government right and wrong at the same time;
8) Why the Faculty finds in N.'s works no reason for dismissing him;
9) What determined the lack of clarity of the whole verdict;
10) Why the Faculty "deems itself (!) entitled (!) as a scientific
authority (!) to examine the essence of the matter", and finally;
11) Why, nevertheless, the Faculty does not want to write in the same
way as Herr N.

Criticism disposes of these important questions with rare thoroughness
in four pages, proving by means of Hegel's logic why everything had to
happen as it did and why no god could have prevented it. In another
place Criticism says that there has not yet been full knowledge of a
single epoch in history; modesty prevents it from saying that it has
full knowledge of at least its own collision and Nauwerck's, which,
although they are not epochs, appear to Criticism to be epoch-_making._

Having "abolished" in itself the "element" of _thoroughness_, Critical
Criticism becomes "_the tranquillity of knowledge"._

Chapter IV “Critical Criticism” As the Tranquillity of Knowledge, Or “Critical Criticism” As Herr Edgar


1) Flora Tristan's "_Union Ouvrière_

The French Socialists maintain that the worker makes everything,
produces everything and yet has no rights, no possessions, in short,
nothing at all. Criticism answers in the words of Herr _Edgar_, the
personification of the _tranquillity of Knowledge_:

"To be able to create everything, a stronger consciousness is needed
than that of the worker. Only the opposite of the above proposition
would be true: the worker makes nothing, therefore he has nothing; but
the reason why he makes nothing is that his work is always individual,
having as its object his most personal needs, and is everyday work."

Here Criticism achieves a height of abstraction in which it regards only
the creations of its own thought and generalities which contradict all
reality as "something", indeed as "_everything"_, The worker creates
nothing because he creates only "individual", that is, perceptible,
palpable, spiritless and un-Critical objects, which are an abomination
in the eyes of pure Criticism. Everything that is real and living is
un-Critical, of a mass nature, and therefore "nothing"; only the ideal,
fantastic creatures of Critical Criticism are _"everything"_.

The worker creates nothing, because his work remains individual, having
only his individual needs as its object, that is, because in the present
world system the individual interconnected branches of labour are
separated from, and even opposed to, one another; in short, because
labour is not _organized_. Criticism's own proposition, if taken in the
only reasonable sense it can possibly have, demands the organization of
labour. Flora Tristan, in an assessment of whose work this great
proposition appears, puts forward the same demand and is treated _en
canaille_ for her insolence in anticipating Critical Criticism. Anyhow,
the proposition that the worker creates nothing is absolutely crazy
except in the sense that the _individual_ worker produces nothing
_whole_, which is tautology. Critical Criticism creates nothing, the
worker creates everything; and so much so that even his intellectual
creations put the whole of Criticism to shame; the English and the
French workers provide proof of this. The worker creates even _man;_ the
critic will never he anything but sub-human though on the other hand, of
course, he has the satisfaction of being a Critical critic.

"Flora Tristan is an example of the feminine dogmatism which must have a
formula and constructs it out of the categories of what exists."

Criticism does nothing but "construct formulae out of the categories of
what exists'', namely, out of the existing _Hegelian_ philosophy and the
existing social aspirations. Formulae, nothing but formulae. And despite
ail its invectives against dogmatism, it condemns itself to dogmatism
and even to _feminine_ dogmatism. It is and remains an old woman --
faded, widowed _Hegelian_ philosophy which paints and adorns its body,
shrivelled into the most repulsive abstraction, and ogles all over
Germany in search of a wooer.


2) Béraud on Prostitutes

Herr Edger, taking pity on social questions, meddles also in
_"conditions of prostitutes"_ (Heft V, p. 26).

He criticizes Paris Police Commissioner Be´raud's book on prostitution
because he is concerned with the _"point of view"_ from which "B´raud
considers the attitude of prostitutes to society" The "tranquillity of
knowledge" is surprised to see that a policeman adopts the point of view
of the police, and it gives the mass to understand that that point of
view is quite wrong. But it does not reveal its own point of view. Of
course not! When Criticism takes up with prostitutes it cannot be
expected to do so in public.


3) Love

In order to complete its transformation into the ''tranquillity of
knowledge", Critical Criticism must first seek to dispose of _love_.
Love is a passion, and nothing is more dangerous for the tranquillity of
knowledge than passion. That is why, speaking of Madame von Paalzow's
novels, which, he assures us, he has "thoroughly _studied_". Herr Edgar
is amazed at "_a childish thing like so-called love_". It is a horror
and abomination and excites the wrath of Critical Criticism, makes it
almost as bitter as gall, indeed, insane.

"Love ... is a cruel goddess, and like every deity she wishes to possess
the whole of man and is not satisfied until he has surrendered to her
not merely his soul, but his physical self. The worship of love is
suffering, the peak of this worship is self-immolation, suicide."

In order to change love into "Moloch", the devil incarnate, Herr Edgar
first changes it into a goddess. When love has become a goddess, i.e., a
theological object, it is of course submitted to _theological
criticism;_ moreover, it is known that god and the devil are not far
apart. Herr Edgar changes love into a "goddess", a, "cruel goddess" at
that, by changing _man who loves_, the love of _man_, into a man of
_love;_ by making "_love_" a being apart, separate from man and as such
independent. By this simple process, by changing the predicate into the
subject, all the attributes and manifestations of human nature can be
Critically transformed into their _negation_ and into _alienations_ of
human nature." Thus, for example, Critical Criticism makes criticism, as
a predicate and activity of man, into a subject apart, criticism which
relates itself to itself and is therefore Critical Criticism: a
"Moloch", the worship of which consists in the self-immolation, the
suicide of man, and in particular of his _ability to think._

"Object," exclaims, the tranquillity of knowledge, "object is the right
expression, for the beloved is important to the lover [denn der Geliebte
ist dem Liebenden] (there is no feminine) only as this external object
of the emotion of his soul, as the object in which he wishes to see his
selfish feeling satisfied."

_Object!_ Horrible! There is nothing more damnable, more profane, more
mass-like than an _object -- agrave; bas_ the object! How could absolute
subjectivity, the _actus puris, "pure"_ Criticism, not see in love its
_bête noire_, that Satan incarnate, in love, which first really teaches
man to believe in the objective world outside himself, which not only
makes man into an object, but even the object into a man!

Love, continues the tranquillity of knowledge, beside itself, is not
even content with turning man into the _category of "object"_ for
another man, it even makes him into a definite, real object, into _this_
bad-individual (see Hegel's _Phänomenologie_ on the categories "This"
and "That", where there is also a polemic against the bad "_This_"),
_external_ object, which does not remain internal, hidden in the brain,
but is sensuously manifest.

Love

Lives not only in the brain immured.

No, the beloved is a _sensuous object_, and if Critical Criticism is to
condescend to recognition of an object, it demands at the very least a
_senseless_ object. But love is an _un-Critical, un-Christian
materialist._

Finally, love even makes one human being "_this external object of the
emotion of the soul"_ of another, the object in which the _selfish_
feeling of the other finds its satisfaction, a selfish feeling because
it _looks for its own essence_ in the other, and that must not be.
Critical Criticism is so _free_ from all _selfishness_ that for it the
whole range of human essence is exhausted _by its own self._

Herr Edgar, of course, does not tell us in what way the beloved differs
from the other "external objects of the emotion of the soul in which the
selfish feelings of men find their satisfaction". The spiritually
profound, meaningful, highly expressive object of love means nothing to
the tranquillity of knowledge but the abstract formula: "this external
object of the emotion of the soul", much as the comet means nothing to
the speculative natural philosopher but "negativity". By making man the
external object of the emotion of his soul, man does in fact attach
"importance" to him, Critical Criticism itself admits, but only
_objective importance_, so to speak, while the importance which
Criticism attaches to objects is none other than that which it attaches
to itself. Hence this importance lies not in "bad _external being_", but
in the "_Nothing"_ of the Critically important object.

If the tranquillity of knowledge has no _object_ in real man, it has, on
the other hand, a _cause in humanity_. Critical love "_is careful_ above
all not to forget the _cause_ behind the personality, for that cause is
none other than the cause of humanity". Un-Critical love does not
separate humanity from the personal, individual man.

Love itself, as an abstract passion, which comes we know not whence and
goes we know not whither, is incapable of`having an interest in internal
development."

In the eyes of the tranquillity of knowledge, love is an abstract
passion according to the _speculative_ terminology in which the concrete
is called abstract and the abstract concrete.

The maid was not born in that valley,
But where she came from, no one knew.
And soon all trace of her did vanish
Once she had bidden them adieu.

For abstraction, love is "the maid from a foreign land" who has no
dialectical passport and is therefore expelled from the country by the
Critical police.

The passion of love is incapable of having an interest in _internal_
development because it cannot be construed _a priori_, because its
development is a real one which takes place in the world of the senses
and between real individuals. But the main interest of speculative
construction is the "Whence" and the "Whither". The "Whence" is the
"_necessity_ of a concept, its proof and deduction" (Hegel). The
"Whither" is the determination "by which each individual link of the
speculative circular course, as the animated content of the method, is
at the same time the beginning of a new link" (Hegel). Hence, only if
its "Whence" and its "Whither" could be construed _a priori_ would love
deserve the "interest" of speculative Criticism.

What Critical Criticism combats here is not merely love but everything
living, everything which is immediate, every sensuous experience, any
and every _real_ experience, the "Whence" and the "Whither" of which one
never _knows_ beforehand.

By overcoming love, Herr Edgar has completely _asserted_ himself as the
"tranquillity of knowledge", and now by his treatment of _Proudhon_, he
can show great virtuosity in knowledge, the "_object_" of which is no
longer _"this external object_", and a still greater _lack of love_ for
the French language.


4) Proudhon

It was not _Proudhon_ himself, but "Proudhon's _point of view"_,
Critical Criticism informs us, that wrote _Qu'est-ce que la propriété_?

"I begin my exposition of Proudhon's point of view by characterizing
its" (the point of view's) "work, "_Qu'est-ce que la propriété_?"

As only the works of the Critical point of view possess a character of
their own, the Critical characterization necessarily begins by giving a
character to Proudhon's work. Herr Edgar gives this work a character by
_translating_ it. He naturally gives it a _bad_ character, for he turns
it into an _object_ of "Criticism"

Proudhon's work, therefore, is subjected to a double attack by Herr
Edgar -- an _unspoken_ one in his characterising translation and an
_outspoken_ one in his Critical comments. We shall see that Herr Edgar
is more devastating when he translates than when he comments.


_Characterizing Translation No. 1_

"I do not wish" (says the Critically translated Proudhon) "to give any
system of the new; I wish for nothing but the abolition of privilege,
the abolition of slavery.... Justice, nothing but justice, that is what
I mean."

The characterized Proudhon confines himself to will and opinion, because
"good will" and unscientific "opinion" are characteristic attributes of
the un-Critical Mass. The characterized Proudhon behaves with the
humility that is fitting for the mass and subordinates what he wishes to
what he does _not_ wish. He does not presume to wish to give a system of
the new, he wishes less, he even wishes for _nothing_ but the abolition
of privilege, etc. Besides this Critical subordination of the will he
has to the will he has not, his very first word is marked by a
characteristic lack of logic. A writer who begins his book by saying
that he does not wish to give any system of the new, should then tell us
what he does wish to give: whether it is a systematised old or an
unsystematised new. But does the characterized Proudhon, who does not
wish to give any system of the new, wish to give the abolition of
privilege? No. He just _wishes_ it.

The real Proudhon says: _"Je ne fais pas de système; je demande la fin
du privilège,"_ etc. I make no system, I demand, etc., that is to say,
the real Proudhon declares that he does not pursue any abstract
scientific aims, but makes immediately practical demands on society. And
the demand he makes is not an arbitrary one. It is motivated and
justified by his whole argument and is the summary of that argument for,
he says, _"justice, rien que justice; tel est le resumé' de mon
discours."_ With his "Justice, nothing but justice, that is what I
mean", the characterized Proudhon gets himself into a position which is
all the more embarrassing as he means much more. According to Herr
Edgar, for example, he _"means"_ that philosophy has not been practical
enough, he "_means_" to refute Charles Comte, and so forth.

The Critical Proudhon asks: "Ought _man_ then always to be unhappy?" In
other words, he asks whether unhappiness is man's moral destiny. The
real Proudhon is a light-minded Frenchman and he asks whether
unhappiness is a material necessity, a must. _(L'homme doit-il être
éternellement malheureux?_)

The mass-type Proudhon says: "Et, sans m'arrêter aux explications â
toute fin des entrepreneurs de réformes, accusant de la détresse
générale, ceux-ci la lâcheté et l'impéritie du pouvoir, ceux-là les
conspirateurs et les émeutes, d'autres l'ignorance et la corruption
générale", etc.

The expression "à toute fin" being a bad mass-type expression that is
not in the mass-type German dictionaries, the Critical, Proudhon
naturally omits this more exact definition of the "explanations". This
term is taken from mass-type French jurisprudence, and "explications ...
toute fin" means explanations which preclude any objection. The Critical
Proudhon censures the _"Reformists"_, a French Socialist Party; the
mass-type Proudhon censures the initiators of reforms. The mass-type
Proudhon distinguishes various classes of "entrepreneurs de réformes".
These (ceux-ci) say _one thing_, those (ceix-là) say _another_, others
(d'autres) a third. The Critical Proudhon, on the other hand, makes _the
same reformists_ "accuse now one, then another, then a third", which in
any case is proof of their inconstancy. The real Proudhon, who follows
mass-type French practice, speaks of "les conspirateurs et les émeutes",
i.e., first of the conspirators and then of their activity, revolts. The
Critical Proudhon, on the other hand, who has lumped together the
various classes of reformists, classifies the rebels and hence says: the
conspirators and the rebels. The mass-type Proudhon speaks of
_ignorance_ and _"general corruption"_. The Critical Proudhon changes
ignorance into stupidity, "corruption" into '"depravity, and finally, as
a Critical critic, makes the stupidity _general._ He himself gives an
immediate example of it by putting "générale" in the singular instead of
the plural. He writes: "l'ignorance et la corruption générale" for
general stupidity and depravity. According to un-Critical French grammar
this should be: "l'ignorance et la corruption générales.

The characterized Proudhon, who speaks and thinks otherwise than the
mass-type one, necessarily went through quite a different _course of
education._ He "questioned the masters of science, read hundreds of
volumes of philosophy and law, etc., and _at last_" he "realised that we
have never yet grasped the meaning of the words Justice, Equity,
Freedom". The real Proudhon thought he had realised _at first (je crus
d'abord reconnaître)_ what the Critical Proudhon realised only "at
last". The Critical alteration of _d'abord_ into _enfin_ is necessary
because the mass may not think it realises anything "at first". The
mass-type Proudhon tells explicitly how he was staggered by the
unexpected result of his studies and distrusted it. Hence he decided to
carry out a _"countertest"_ and asked himself: "Is it possible that
mankind has so long and so universally been mistaken over the principles
of the application of morals? How and why was it mistaken?" etc. He made
the correctness of his observations dependent on the solution of these
questions. He found that in morals, as in all other branches of
knowledge, errors _"are stages of science"_. The Critical Proudhon, on
the other hand, immediately trusted the first impression that his
studies of political economy, law and the like made upon him. Needless
to say, the mass cannot proceed in any _thorough_ way; it is bound to
raise the first results of its investigations to the level of
indisputable truths. It has "reached the end before it has started,
before it has measured itself with its opposite". Hence, "it is seen"
later "that it is not yet at the beginning when it thinks it has reached
the end".

The Critical Proudhon therefore continues his reasoning in the most
untenable and incoherent way.

"Our knowledge of moral laws is not complete from the beginning; thus it
can for some time suffice for social progress, but in the long run it
will lead us on a false path."

The Critical Proudhon does not give any reason why incomplete knowledge
of moral laws call suffice for social progress even for a single day.
The real Proudhon, having asked himself whether and why mankind could
universally and so long have been mistaken and having found as the
solution that all errors are stages of science and that our most
imperfect judgments contain a sum of truths sufficient for a certain
number of inductions and for a certain area of practical life, beyond
which number and which area they lead theoretically to the absurd and
practically to decay, is in a position to say that even imperfect
knowledge of moral laws can suffice for social progress for a time.

The Critical Proudhon says:

"But if new knowledge has become necessary, a bitter struggle arises
between the old prejudices and the new idea."

How can a struggle arise against an opponent who does _not yet_ exist?
Admitted, the Critical Proudhon has told us that a new idea has become
necessary but he has not said that it has already _come into existence_.

The mass-type Proudhon says:

"Once higher knowledge has become indispensable it is _never lacking_",
it is therefore ready at hand. "_It is then_ that the struggle begins."

The Critical Proudhon asserts: "It is man's destiny to learn step by
step", as if man did not have a quite different destiny, namely, that of
being man, and as if that learning "step by step" necessarily brought
him a step farther. I can go step by step and arrive at the very point
from which I set out. The un-Critical Proudhon speaks, not of "destiny",
but of the _condition (condition)_ for man to learn not _step by step
(pas à pas)_, but _by degrees (par degrés)_. The Critical Proudhon says
to himself:

"Among the principles upon which society rests there is one which
society does not understand, which is spoilt by society's ignorance and
is the cause of all evil. Nevertheless, man honours _this_ principle"
and "wills it, for otherwise it would have no influence. Now this
principle which is true in its _essence_; but is false in the way we
conceive it ... what is it?"

In the first sentence the Critical Proudhon says that the principle is
spoilt, misunderstood by society,hence that it is correct in itself. In
the second sentence he admits superfluously that it is true in its
essence; nevertheless he reproaches society with willing and honouring
"this principle". The mass-type Proudhon, on the other hand, reproaches
society with willing and honouring not this principle, but this
principle _as_ falsified by our ignorance ("_Ce principe ... tel que
notre ignorance l'a fait, est honoré_"). The Critical Proudhon finds the
_essence_ of the principle in its untrue form _true_. The mass-type
Proudhon finds that the essence of the falsified principle is our
incorrect conception, but that it is true in its _object (objet)_, just
as the essence of alchemy and astrology is our imagination, but their
objects -- the movement of the heavenly bodies and the chemical
properties of substances -- are true.

The Critical Proudhon continues his monologue:

The object of our investigation is the law, the definition of the social
principle. Now the politicians, i.e., the men of social science, are a
prey to complete lack of clarity...; but as there is a reality at the
basis of every error, in their books we shall find the truth, which they
have brought into the world without knowing it."

The Critical Proudhon has a most fantastic way of reasoning. From the
fact that the politicians are ignorant and unclear, he goes on in the
most arbitrary fashion to say that a reality lies _at the basis_ of
every error, which can all the less he doubted as there is a reality at
the basis of every error -- in the person of the one who errs. From the
fact that a reality lies at the basis of every error he goes on to
conclude that truth is to be found _in the books_ of politicians. And
finally he even makes out that the politicians have brought this truth
into the _world_. Had they brought it into the _world_ we should not
need to look for it in their _books._

The mass-type Proudhon says:

"The politicians do not understand one another _(ne s'entendent pas);_
their error is therefore a subjective one, having its origin in them
_(donc c'est en eux qu'est l'erreur)._" Their mutual misunderstanding
proves their one-sidedness. They confuse "their private opinion with
common sense", and "as", according to the previous deduction, "every
error has a true reality as its object, their books must contain the
truth, which they unconsciously have put there" -- i.e., in their books
-- "but have not brought into the world" _(dans leurs livres doit se
trouver la vérité qu' à leur insu its y auront mise)._

The Critical Proudhon asks himself: "What is justice, what is its
essence, its character, its meaning?" As if it had some meaning apart
from its essence and character. The un-Critical Proudhon asks: What is
its principle, its character and its formula _(formule)_? The formula is
the principle as a principle of scientific reasoning. In the mass-type
French language there is an essential difference between _formule and
signification._ In the Critical French language there is none.

After his highly irrelevant disquisitions, the Critical Proudhon pulls
himself together and exclaims:

"Let us try to get somewhat closer to our object."

The un-Critical Proudhon, on the other hand, who arrived at his object
long ago, tries to attain more precise and more positive definitions of
his object _(d'arriver à quelque chose de plus précis et de plus
positif)._

For the Critical Proudhon "the law" is a "_definition_ of what is
right", for the un-Critical Proudhon it is a "_statement" (déclaration)_
of it. The un-Critical Proudhon disputes the view that right is made by
law. But a "definition of the law" can mean that the law is defined just
as it can mean that it defines. Previously, the Critical Proudhon
himself spoke about the definition of the social principle in this
latter sense. To be sure, it is unseemly of the mass-type Proudhon to
make such nice distinctions.

Considering these differences between the Critically characterised
Proudhon and the real Proudhon, it is no wonder that Proudhon No. 1
seeks to _prove_ quite different things than Proudhon No. 2.

The Critical Proudhon

"_seeks to prove by the experience of history_" that "if the idea that
we have of what is just and right is false, _evidently"_ (he tries to
prove it in spite of its evidence) "all its applications in law must be
bad, all our institutions must be defective".

The mass-type Proudhon is far from wishing to prove what is evident. He
says instead:

"If the idea that we have of what is just and right were badly defined,
if it were incomplete or even false, it is _evident_ that all our
legislative applications would be bad", etc.

What, then, does the un-Critical Proudhon wish to prove?

"This hypothesis," he continues, "of the perversion of justice in our
understanding, and as a necessary consequence in our actions, would be
an established fact if the opinions of men concerning the concept of
justice and its applications had not remained constantly the same, if at
different times they had undergone modifications; in a word, if there
had been progress in ideas."

And precisely that inconstancy, that change, that progress "is what
_history_ proves by the most striking testimonies". And the un-Critical
Proudhon quotes these striking testimonies of history. His Critical
double, who proves a completely different proposition by the experience
of history, also presents that experience itself in a different way.

According to the real Proudhon, "the wise" _(les sages),_ according to
the Critical Proudhon, "the philosophers", foresaw the fall of the Roman
Empire. The Critical Proudhon can of course consider only philosophers
to be wise men. According to the real Proudhon, Roman "rights were
consecrated by ten centuries of law practice" or "administration of
justice" _(ces droits consacrés par une justice dix: fois séculaire)_;
according to the Critical Proudhon, Rome had "rights consecrated by ten
centuries of _justice"._

According to the same Proudhon No. 1, the Romans reasoned as follows:

"Rome ... was victorious through its policy and its gods; any reform in
worship or public spirit would be stupidity and profanation" (according
to the Critical Proudhon, _sacrilège_ means not the profanation or
desecration of a holy thing, as in the mass-type French language, but
just profanation). "Had it wished to free the peoples, it would thereby
have renounced its right." "Rome had thus fact and right in its favour,"
Proudhon No. 1 adds.

According to the un-Critical Proudhon, the Romans reasoned more
logically. The _fact_ was set out in detail:

"The slaves are the most fertile source of its wealth; the freeing of
the peoples would therefore be the _ruin of its finance._"

And the mass-type Proudhon adds, referring to law: "Rome's claims were
justified by the law of nations (_droit des gens_)." This way of proving
the right of subjugation was completely in keeping with the Roman view
on law. See the mass-type pandects: "_jure gentium servitus invasit_"
(Fr. 4. D.I.I)."

According to the Critical Proudhon, "idolatry, slavery and softness"
were "the basis of Roman institutions", of all its institutions without
exception. The real Proudhon says: "Idolatry in religion, slavery in the
state and Epicureanism in private life" _(épicurisme_ in the ordinary
French language is not synonymous with _mollesse_, softness) "were the
basis of the institutions." Within that Roman situation there
"appeared", says the mystic Proudhon, "the Word of God", whereas
according to the real, rationalistic Proudhon, it was "a man who
_called_ himself the Word of God". In the real Proudhon this man calls
the priests "vipers" _(vipères);_ in the Critical Proudhon he speaks
more courteously with them and calls them "serpents". In the former he
speaks in the Roman way of "advocates" _[Advokaten]_, in the latter in
the German way of "lawyers" _[Rechtsgelehrte]._

The Critical Proudhon calls the spirit of the French Revolution a spirit
of contradiction, and adds:

"That is enough to realised that the new which replaced the old had on
itself _[an sich]_ nothing methodical and considered."

He cannot refrain from repeating mechanically the favourite categories
of Critical Criticism, the "old" and the "new". He cannot refrain from
the senseless demand that the "new" should have on itself [an sich]
something methodical and considered, just as one might have a stain on
oneself [an sich]. The real Proudhon says:

"That is enough to prove that the new order of things which was
substituted for the old was in itself [in sich] without method or
reflection."

Carried away by the memory of the French Revolution, the Critical
Proudhon _revolutionises_ the French language so much that he translates
un fait physique by "a fact of physics", and _un fait intellectuel_ by
"a fact of the intellect". By this revolution in the French language the
Critical Proudhon manages to put physics in possession of all the facts
to be found in nature. Raising natural science unduly on one side, he
debases it just as much on the other by depriving it of intellect and
distinguishing between a fact of physics and a fact of the intellect. To
the same extent he makes all further psychological and logical
investigation unnecessary by raising the intellectual fact directly to
the level of a fact of the intellect.

Since the Critical Proudhon, Proudhon No. 1, has not the slightest idea
what the real Proudhon, Proudhon No. 2, wishes to prove by his
historical deduction, neither does the real content of that deduction
exist for him, namely, the proof of the change in the views on law and
of the continuous _implementation_ of justice by the _negation_ of
historical actual right.

"La société fut sauvée par la _négation_ de ses principes ... et la
violation des droits les plus sacrés."

Thus the real Proudhon proves how the negation of Roman law led to the
widening of right in the Christian _conception_, the negation of the
right of conquest to the right of the communes and the negation of the
whole feudal law by the French Revolution to the present more
comprehensive system of law.

Critical Criticism could not possibly leave Proudhon the glory of having
discovered the law of the implementation of a principle by its negation.
In this conscious formulation, this idea was a real revelation for the
French.


_Critical Comment No._ 1

As the first criticism of any science is necessarily influenced by the
premises of the science it is fighting against, so Proudhon's treatise
_Qu'est-ce que la propriété?_ is the criticism of _political economy_
from the standpoint of political economy. -- We need not go more deeply
into the juridical part of the book, which criticizes law from the
standpoint of law, for our main interest is the criticism of political
economy. -- Proudhon's treatise will therefore be scientifically
superseded by a criticism of _political economy_, including Proudhon's
conception of political economy. This work became possible only owing to
the work of Proudhon himself, just as Proudhon's criticism has as its
premise the criticism of the mercantile system by the Physiocrats, Adam
Smith's criticism of the Physiocrats, Ricardo's criticism of Adam Smith,
and the works of Fourier and Saint-Simon.

All treatises on political economy take _private property_ for granted.
This basic premise is for them an incontestable fact to which they
devote no further investigation, indeed a fact which is spoken about
only _"accidentellement''_, as Say naively admits. But Proudhon makes a
critical investigation -- the first resolute, ruthless, and at the same
time scientific investigation -- of the basis of political economy,
_private property._ This is the great scientific advance he made, an
advance which revolutionizes political economy and for the first time
makes a real science of political economy possible. Proudhon's treatise
_Qu'est-ce que la propriété?_ is as important for modern political
economy as Sieyês' work _Qu'est-ce que le tiers état?_ for modern
politics.

Proudhon does not consider the further creations of private property,
e.g., wages, trade, value, price, money, etc., as forms of private
property in themselves, as they are considered, for example, in the
_Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher (see Outlines of a Critique of
Political Economy_ by F. Engels), but uses these economic premises in
arguing against the political economists; this is fully in keeping with
his historically justified standpoint to which we referred above.

Accepting the relationships of private property as human and rational,
political economy operates in permanent contradiction to its basic
premise, private property, a contradiction analogous to that of the
theologian who continually gives a human interpretation to religious
conceptions, and by that very fact comes into constant conflict with his
basic premise, the superhuman character of religion. Thus in political
economy wages appear at the beginning as the proportional share of the
product due to labour. Wages and profit on capital stand in the most
friendly, mutually stimulating, apparently most human relationship to
each other. Afterwards it turns out that they stand in the most hostile
relationship, in _inverse_ proportion to each other. Value is determined
at the beginning in an apparently rational way, by the cost of
production of an object and by its social usefulness. Later it turns out
that value is determined quite fortuitously and that it does not need to
bear any relation to either the cost of production or social usefulness.
The size of wages is determined at the beginning by _free_ agreement
between the free worker and the free capitalist. Later it turns out that
the worker is compelled to allow the capitalist to determine it, just as
the capitalist is compelled to fix it as low as possible. _Freedom_ of
the contracting parties has been supplanted by _compulsion_. The same
holds good of trade and-all other economic relationships. The economists
themselves occasionally feel these contradictions, the development of
which is the main content of the conflict between them. When, however,
the economists become conscious of these contradictions, _they
themselves_ attack _private property_ in one or other _particular_ form
as the falsifier of what is in itself (i.e., in their imagination)
rational wages, in itself rational value, in itself rational trade. Adam
Smith, for instance, occasionally polemises against the capitalists,
Destutt de Tracy against the money-changers, Simonde de Sismondi against
the factory system, Ricardo against landed property, and nearly all
modern economists against the _non-industrial_ capitalists, among whom
property appears as a mere _consumer._

Thus, as an exception -- when they attack some special abuse -- the
economists occasionally stress the semblance of humanity in economic
relations, but sometimes, and as a rule, they take these relations
precisely in their clearly pronounced _difference_ from the human, in
their strictly economic sense. They stagger about within this
contradiction completely unaware of it.

Now _Proudhon_ has put an end to this unconsciousness once for all. He
takes the _human semblance_ of the economic relations seriously and
sharply opposes it to their _inhuman reality_. He forces them to be in
reality what they imagine themselves to be, or rather to give up their
own idea of themselves and confess their real inhumanity. He therefore
consistently depicts as the falsifier of economic relations not this or
that particular kind of private property, as other economists do, but
private property as such and in its entirety. He has done all that
criticism of political economy from the standpoint of political economy
can do.

Herr Edgar, who wishes to _characterise_ the _standpoint_ of the
treatise _Qu'est-ce que la propriété?_, naturally does not say a word
either of political economy or of the distinctive character of this
book, which is precisely that it has made the _essence of private
property_ the vital question of political economy and jurisprudence.
This is all self-evident for Critical Criticism. Proudhon, it says, has
done nothing new by his negation of private property. He has only let
out a secret which Critical Criticism did not want to divulge.

"Proudhon," Herr Edgar continues immediately after his characterising
translation, "therefore finds something absolute, an eternal foundation
in history, a god that guides mankind -- justice."

Proudhon's book, written in France in 1840, does not adopt the
standpoint of German development in 1844. It is Proudhon's standpoint, a
standpoint which is shared by countless diametrically opposed French
writers, which therefore gives Critical Criticism the advantage of
having characterized the most contradictory standpoints with a single
stroke of the pen. Incidentally, to be relieved from this Absolute in
history as well one has only to apply consistently the law formulated by
Proudhon himself, that of the implementation of justice by its negation.
If Proudhon does not carry consistency as far as that, it is only
because he had the misfortune of being born a Frenchman, not a German.

For Herr Edgar, Proudhon has become a _theological_ object by his
Absolute in history, his belief in justice, and Critical Criticism,
which is _ex professo_ a criticism of theology, can now set to work on
him in order to expatiate on "religious conceptions"

"It is a characteristic of every religious conception that it sets up as
a dogma a situation in which at the end one of the opposites comes out
victorious as the only truth."

We shall see how religious Critical Criticism sets up as a dogma a
situation in which at the end one of the opposites, _"Criticism"_, comes
out victorious over the other, the "Mass", as the only truth. By seeing
in mass-type justice an Absolute, a god of history, Proudhon committed
an injustice that is all the greater because just Criticism has
_explicitly_ reserved for itself the role of that Absolute, that god in
history.


_Critical Comment No._ 2

"The fact of misery, of poverty, makes Proudhon one-sided in his
considerations; he sees in it a _contradiction_ to equality and justice;
it provides him with a weapon. Hence this fact becomes for him absolute
and justified, whereas the fact of property becomes unjustified."

The tranquillity of knowledge tells us that Proudhon sees in the fact of
poverty a contradiction to justice, that is to say, finds it
unjustified; yet in the same breath it assures us that this fact becomes
for him absolute and justified.

Hitherto political economy proceeded from _wealth_, which the movement
of private property supposedly creates for the _nations_, to its
considerations which are an apology for private property. Proudhon
proceeds from the opposite side, which political economy sophistically
conceals, from the poverty bred by the movement of private property to
his considerations which negate private property. The first criticism of
private property proceeds, of course, from the fact in which its
contradictory essence appears in the form that is most perceptible and
most glaring and most directly arouses man's indignation -- from the
fact of poverty, of misery.

"Criticism, on the other hand, joins the two facts, poverty and
property, in a single unity, grasps the inner link between them and
makes them a single whole, which it investigates as such to find the
preconditions for its existence."

Criticism, which has hitherto understood nothing of the facts of
property and of poverty, uses, "on the other hand", the deed which it
has accomplished in its imagination as an argument against Proudhon' s
real deed. It unites the _two_ facts in a _single_ one, and having made
_one_ out of _two_, grasps the inner link between the two. Criticism
cannot deny that Proudhon, too, is aware of an inner link between the
facts of poverty and of property, since because of that very link he
abolishes property in order to abolish poverty. Proudhon did even more.
He proved in detail _how_ the movement of capital produces poverty. But
Critical Criticism does not bother with such trifles. It recognizes that
poverty and private property are _opposites_ -- a rather widespread
recognition. It makes poverty and wealth _a single whole_, which it
"investigates _as such_ to find the preconditions for its existence" an
investigation which is all the more superfluous since it has just _made_
"the whole as such" and therefore its _making_ is in itself the
precondition for the existence of this whole.

By investigating "the whole as such" to find the preconditions for its
existence, Critical Criticism is searching in the genuine theological
manner _outside_ the "whole" for the preconditions for its existence.
Critical speculation operates outside the object which it pretends to
deal with. Whereas the _whole antithesis_ is nothing but the _movement
of both its sides_, and the precondition for the existence of the whole
lies in the very nature of the two sides. But Critical Criticism
dispenses with the study of this real movement which forms the whole in
order to be able to declare that it, Critical Criticism as the
tranquillity of knowledge, is above both extremes of the antithesis, and
that its activity, which has made "the whole as such", is now alone in a
position to abolish the abstraction of which it is the maker.

Proletariat and wealth are opposites; as such they form a single whole.
They are both creations of the world of private property. The question
is exactly what place each occupies in the antithesis. It is not
sufficient to declare them two sides of a single whole.

Private property as private property, as wealth, is compelled to
maintain _itself_, and thereby its opposite, the proletariat, in
_existence_. That is the _positive_ side of the antithesis,
self-satisfied private property.

The proletariat, on the contrary, is compelled as proletariat to abolish
itself and thereby its opposite, private property, which determines its
existence, and which makes it proletariat. It is the _negative_ side of
the antithesis, its restlessness within its very self, dissolved and
self-dissolving private property.

The propertied class and the class of the proletariat present the same
human self-estrangement. But the former class feels at ease and
strengthened in this self-estrangement, it recognizes estrangement as
_its own power_ and has in it the _semblance_ of a human existence. The
class of the proletariat feels annihilated in estrangement; it sees in
it its own powerlessness and the reality of an inhuman existence. It is,
to use an expression of Hegel, in its abasement the indignation at that
abasement, an _indignation_ to which it is necessarily driven by the
contradiction between its human _nature_ and its condition of life,
which is the outright, resolute and comprehensive negation of that
nature.

Within this antithesis the private property-owner is therefore the
_conservative_ side, the proletarian the _destructive_ side. From the
former arises the action of preserving the antithesis, from the latter
the action of annihilating it.

Indeed private property drives itself in its economic movement towards
its own dissolution, but only through a development which does not
depend on it, which is unconscious and which takes place against the
will of private property by the very nature of things, only inasmuch as
it produces the proletariat as proletariat, poverty which is conscious
of its spiritual and physical poverty, dehumanization which is conscious
of its dehumanization, and therefore self-abolishing. The proletariat
executes the sentence that private property pronounces on itself by
producing the proletariat, just as it executes the sentence that
wage-labour pronounces on itself by producing wealth for others and
poverty for itself. When the proletariat is victorious, it by no means
becomes the absolute side of society, for it is victorious only by
abolishing itself and its opposite. Then the proletariat disappears as
well as the opposite which determines it, private property.

When socialist writers ascribe this world-historic role to the
proletariat, it is not at all, as Critical Criticism pretends to
believe, because they regard the proletarians as _gods_. Rather the
contrary. Since in the fully-formed proletariat the abstraction of all
humanity, even of the _semblance_ of humanity, is practically complete;
since the conditions of life of the proletariat sum up all the
conditions of life of society today in their most inhuman form; since
man has lost himself in the proletariat, yet at the same time has not
only gained theoretical consciousness of that loss, but through urgent,
no longer removable, no longer disguisable, absolutely imperative _need_
-- the practical expression of _necessity_ -- is driven directly to
revolt against this inhumanity, it follows that the proletariat can and
must emancipate itself. But it cannot emancipate itself without
abolishing the conditions of its own life. It cannot abolish the
conditions of its own life without abolishing all the inhuman conditions
of life of society today which are summed up in its own situation. Not
in vain does it go through the stern but steeling school of _labour_. It
is not a question of what this or that proletarian, or even the whole
proletariat, at the moment _regards_ as its aim. It is a question of
_what the proletariat is_, and what, in accordance with this _being_, it
will historically be compelled to do. Its aim and historical action is
visibly and irrevocably foreshadowed in its own life situation as well
as in the whole organization of bourgeois society today. There is no
need to explain here that a large part of the English and French
proletariat is already _conscious_ of its historic task and is
constantly working to develop that consciousness into complete clarity.

"Critical Criticism" can all the less admit this since it has proclaimed
itself the exclusive creative element in history. To it belong the
historical antitheses, to it belongs the task of abolishing them. That
is why it issues the following _notification_ through its incarnation,
Edgar:

"Education and lack of education, property and absence of property,
these antitheses, if they are not to be desecrated, must be wholly and
entirely the concern of Criticism."

Property and absence of property have received metaphysical consecration
as Critical speculative antitheses. That is why only the hand of
Critical Criticism can touch them without committing a sacrilege.
Capitalists and workers must not interfere in their mutual relationship.

Far from having any idea that his Critical conception of antitheses
could be touched, that this holy thing could be desecrated, Herr Edgar
lets his opponent make an objection that he alone could make to himself.

"Is it then possible," the imaginary opponent of Critical Criticism
asks, "to use other concepts than those already existing -- liberty,
equality, etc.? I answer" (note Herr Edgar's answer) "that Greek and
Latin perished as soon as the range of thoughts that they served to
express was exhausted."

It is now clear why Critical Criticism does not give a single thought in
_German_. The language of its thoughts has not yet come into being in
spite of all that Herr Reichardt by his Critical handling of foreign
words, Herr Faucher by his handling of English, and Herr Edgar by his
handling of French, have done to prepare the _new Critical_ language.


_Characterizing Translation No. 2_

The Critical Proudhon says:

"The husbandmen divided the land among themselves; equality consecrated
only possession; on this occasion it consecrated property."

The Critical Proudhon makes landed property arise simultaneously with
the division of land. He effects the transition from possession to
property by the expression "on this occasion".

The real Proudhon says:

"Husbandry was the basis of possession of the land.... It was not enough
to ensure for the tiller the fruit of his labour without ensuring for
him at the same time the instruments of production. To guard the weaker
against the encroachments of the stronger ... it was felt necessary to
establish permanent demarcation lines between owners."

On this occasion, therefore, it is _possession_ that equality
consecrated in the first place.

"Every year saw the population increase and the greed of the settlers
grow; it was thought ambition should be checked by new insuperable
barriers. Thus the land became property owing to the need for equality
... doubtless the division was never geographically equal ... but the
principle nevertheless remained the same; equality had consecrated
possession, equality consecrated property."

According to the Critical Proudhon

"the ancient founders of property, absorbed with concern for their
needs, overlooked the fact that to the right of property corresponded at
the same time the right to alienate, to sell, to give away, to acquire
and to lose, which destroyed the equality from which they started out."

According to the real Proudhon it was not that the founders of property
overlooked this course of its development in their concern for their
needs. It was rather that they did not foresee it; but even if they had
been able to foresee it, their actual need would have gained the upper
hand. Besides, the real Proudhon is too mass-minded to counterpose the
right to alienate, sell, etc., to the "_right of property_", i.e., to
counterpose the varieties to the species. He contrasts the "right to
_keep_ one's heritage" to the "right to _alienate_ it, etc.", which
constitutes a real opposition and a real step forward.


_Critical Comment No. 3_

"On what then does Proudhon base his proof of the impossibility of
property? Difficult as it is to believe it -- on the same principle of
equality!"

A short consideration would have sufficed to arouse the belief of Herr
Edgar. He must be aware that Herr Bruno Bauer based all his arguments on
"_infinite_ self-consciousness" and that he also saw in this principle
the creative principle of the gospels which, by their infinite
unconsciousness, appear to be in direct contradiction to infinite
self-consciousness. In the same way Proudhon conceives equality as the
creative principle of private property, which is in direct contradiction
to equality. If Herr Edgar compares French _equality_ with German
"self-consciousness" for an instant, he will see that the latter
principle expresses in _German_, i.e., in abstract thought, what the
former says in _French_, that is, in the language of politics and of
thoughtful observation. Self-consciousness is man's equality with
himself in pure thought. Equality is man's consciousness of himself in
the element of practice, i.e., man's consciousness of other men as his
equals and man's attitude to other men as his equals. Equality is the
French expression for the unity of human essence, for man's
consciousness of his species and his attitude towards his species, for
the practical identity of man with man, i.e., for the social or human
relation of man to man. Hence, just as destructive criticism in Germany,
before it had progressed in _Feuerbach_ to the consideration of _real
man_, tried to resolve everything definite and existing by the principle
of _self-consciousness_, destructive criticism in France tried to do the
same by the principle of equality.

"Proudhon is angry with philosophy, for which, in itself, we cannot
blame him. But why is he angry? Philosophy, he maintains, has not yet
been practical enough; it has mounted the high horse of speculation and
from up there human beings have seemed much too small. I think that
philosophy is over practical, i.e., it has so far been nothing but the
abstract expression of the existing state of things; it has always been
captive to the premises of the existing state of things, which it has
accepted as absolute."

The opinion that philosophy is the abstract expression of the existing
state of things does not belong originally to Herr Edgar. It belongs to
_Feuerbach_, who was the first to describe philosophy as speculative and
mystical empiricism and to prove it. But Herr Edgar manages to give this
opinion an original, Critical twist. While Feuerbach concludes that
philosophy must come down from the heaven of speculation to the depth of
human misery, Herr Edgar, on the contrary, informs us that philosophy is
over-practical. However, it seems rather that philosophy, precisely
because it was only the transcendent, abstract expression of the actual
state of things, by reason of its transcendentalism and abstraction, by
reason of its _imaginary difference_ from the world, must have imagined
it had left the actual state of things and real human beings far below
itself. On the other hand, it seems that because philosophy was not
really different from the world it could not pronounce any _real
judgment_ on it, it could not bring any real differentiating force to
bear on it and could therefore not interfere _practically_, but had to
be satisfied at most with a practice _in abstracto_. Philosophy was
over-practical only in the sense that it soared above practice. Critical
Criticism, by lumping humanity together in a spiritless mass, gives the
most striking proof how infinitely small real human beings seem to
speculation. In this the old speculation agrees with Critical Criticism,
as the following sentence out of Hegel's _Rechtsphilosophie_ shows:

"From the standpoint of needs, it is the concrete object of the idea
that is called man; therefore what we are concerned with here, and
properly speaking only here, is man in this sense."

In other cases in which speculation speaks of man it does not mean the
_concrete_, but the _abstract, the idea, the spirit_, etc. The way in
which philosophy expresses the actual state of things is strikingly
exemplified by Herr Faucher in connection with the actual English
situation and by Herr Edgar in connection with the actual situation of
the French language.

"Thus Proudhon also is practical because, finding that the concept of
equality is the basis of the proofs in favour of property, he argues
from the same concept against property."

Proudhon here does exactly the same thing as the German critics who,,
finding that the proofs of the existence of God are based on the idea of
man, argue from that idea against the existence of God.

"If the consequences of the principle of equality are more powerful than
equality itself, how does Proudhon intend to help that principle to
acquire its sudden power?"

Self-consciousness, according to Herr Bruno Bauer, lies at the basis of
all religious ideas. It is, he says, the creative principle of the
gospels. Why, then, were the consequences of the principle of
self-consciousness more powerful than self-consciousness itself?
Because, the answer comes after the German fashion, self-consciousness
is indeed the creative principle of religious ideas, but only as
self-consciousness outside itself, in contradiction to itself, alienated
and estranged. Self-consciousness that has come to itself, that
understands itself, that apprehends its essence, therefore governs the
creations of its self-alienation. Proudhon finds himself in exactly the
same case, with the difference, of course, that he speaks French whereas
we speak German, and he therefore expresses in a French way what we
express in a German way.

Proudhon asks himself why equality, although as the creative principle
of reason it underlies the institution of property and as the ultimate
rational foundation is the basis of all arguments in favour of property,
nevertheless does not exist, while its negation, private property, does.
He accordingly considers the fact of property in itself. He proves
"that, in truth, property, as an institution and a principle, is
_impossible_" (p. 34), i.e., that _it contradicts itself_ and abolishes
itself in all points; that, to put it in the German way, it is the
existence of alienated, self-contradicting, self-estranged equality. The
real state of things in France, like the recognition of this
estrangement, suggests correctly to Proudhon the necessity of the real
abolition of this estrangement.

While negating private property, Proudhon feels the need to justify the
existence of private property historically. His argument, like all first
arguments of this kind, is pragmatic, i.e., he assumes that earlier
generations wished consciously and with reflection to realised in their
institutions that equality which for him represents the human essence.

"We always come back to the same thing.... Proudhon writes in the
interest of the proletarians."

He does not write in the interest of self-sufficient Criticism or out of
any abstract, self-made interest, but out of a mass-type, real, historic
interest, an interest that goes beyond criticism, that will go as far as
a crisis. Not only does Proudhon write in the interest of the
proletarians, he is himself a proletarian, an ouvrier. His work is a
scientific manifesto of the French proletariat and therefore has quite a
different historical significance from that of the literary botch-work
of any Critical Critic.

"Proudhon writes in the interest of those who have nothing; to have and
not to have are for him absolute categories. To have is for him the
highest, because at the same time not to have is for him the highest
object of thought. Every man ought to have, but no more or less than
another, Proudhon thinks. But one should bear in mind that of all I
have, only what I have exclusively, or what I have more of than other
people have, is interesting for me. With equality, both to have and
equality itself will be a matter of indifference to me.

According to Herr Edgar, _having and not having_ are for Proudhon
absolute categories. Critical Criticism sees nothing but categories
everywhere. Thus, according to Herr Edgar, having and not having, wages,
salary, want and need, and work to satisfy that need, are nothing but
categories.

If society had to free itself only from the _categories_ of having and
not having, how easy would the "overcoming" and "abolition" of those
categories be made for it by any dialectician, even if he were weaker
than Herr Edgar! Indeed, Herr Edgar considers this such a trifle that he
does not think it worth the trouble to give even an _explanation_ of the
categories of having and not having as an argument against Proudhon. But
not having is not a mere category, it is a most dismal reality; today
the man who has nothing is nothing, for he is cut off from existence in
general, and still more from a human existence, for the condition of not
having is the condition of the complete separation of man from his
objectivity. Therefore not having seems quite justified in being the
highest object of thought for Proudhon; all the more since so little
thought had been given to this subject prior to him and the socialist
writers in general. Not having is the most despairing _spiritualism_, a
complete unreality of the human being, a complete reality of the
dehumanized being, a very positive having, a having of hunger, of cold,
of disease, of crime, of debasement, of hebetude, of all inhumanity and
abnormity. But every object which for the first time is made the object
of thought with full consciousness of its importance is the _highest
object of thought._

Proudhon's wish to abolish not having and the old way of having is quite
identical with his wish to abolish the practically estranged relation of
man to his _objective essence_ and the _economic_ expression of human
self-estrangement. But since his criticism of political economy is still
captive to the premises of political economy, the re-appropriation of
the objective world itself is still conceived in the economic form of
_possession_.

Proudhon does not oppose having to not having, as Critical Criticism
makes him do; he opposes _possession_ to the old way of having, to
_private property._ He proclaims possession to be a "_social function_".
What is "interesting" in a function, however, is not to "exclude" the
other person, but to affirm and to realised the forces of my own being.

Proudhon did not succeed in giving this thought appropriate development
The idea of "_equal_ possession" is the economic and therefore itself
still estranged expression for the fact that the _object as being for
man_, as the _objective being of man_, is at the same time the
_existence of man for other men_, his human relation to other men, the
_social behaviour of man to man_. Proudhon abolishes economic
estrangement _within_ economic estrangement.


_Characterising Translation No. 3_

The Critical Proudhon has a _Critical property-owner_, too, according to
whose

"own admission those who had to work for him lost what he appropriated."

The mass-type Proudhon says to the mass-type property-owner:

"You have worked! Ought you never to have let others work for you! How,
then, have they lost while working for you, what you were able to
acquire while not working for them!"

By "_richesse naturelle"_," the Critical Proudhon makes Say understand
"natural _possessions_" although Say, to preclude any error, states
explicitly in the _Épitom;é_ to his _Traité d'économie politique_ that
by _richesse_ he understands neither property nor possession, but a "sum
of values". Of course, the Critiàcal Proudhon reforms Say just as he
himself is reformed by Herr Edgar. He makes Say "infer immediately a
right to take a field as property" because land is easier to appropriate
than air or water. But Say, far from inferring from the greater
possibility of appropriating land a property right to it, says instead
quite explicitly:

"Les _droits_ des propritaires de terres -- remontent une _spoliation_."
(_Traité d'conomie politique_, edition III. t. I., p. 136, Nota.)

That is why, in Say's opinion, there must be "_concours de la
législation_" and "_droit positif_" to provide a basis for the _right_
to landed property. The real Proudhon does not make Say "immediately"
_infer_ the right of landed property from the easier appropriation of
land. He reproaches him with basing himself on possibility _instead_ of
right and _confusing_ the question of possibility with the question of
right:

"Say prend la possibilité _pour_ le droit. On ne demande pas pourquoi la
terre a été plutt appropriée que la mer et les airs; on veut savoir, en
vertu de quel droit I'homme s'est approprié cette richesse.

The Critical Proudhon continues:

"The only remark to be made on this is that with the appropriation of a
piece of land the other elements -- air, water and fire -- are also
appropriated: _terra, aqua, aëre et igne interdicti sumus_."

Far from making "_only_" this remark, the real Proudhon says, on the
contrary, that he draws "attention", to the appropriation of air and
water incidentally (_en passant_). The Critical Proudhon makes an
unaccountable use of the Roman formula of banishment. He forgets to say
who the "we" are who have been banished. The real Proudhon addresses the
non-property-owners :

"Proletarians... property _excommunicates_ us: _terra, etc. interdicti
sumus_."

The Critical Proudhon polemises against Charles Comte as follows:

"Charles Comte thinks that, in order to live, man needs air, food and
clothing. Some of these things, like air and water, are inexhaustible
and therefore always remain common property; but others are available in
smaller quantities and become private property. Charles Comte therefore
bases his proof on the concepts of limitedness and unlimitedness; he
would perhaps have come to a different conclusion had he made the
concepts of dispensability and indispensability his main categories."

How childish the Critical Proudhon's polemic is! He expects Charles
Comte to give up the categories he uses for his proof and to jump over
to others so as to come, not to his own conclusions, but "_perhaps_" to
those of the Critical Proudhon.

The real Proudhon does not make any such demands on Charles Comte; he
does not dispose of him with a "perhaps", but defeats him with his own
categories.

Charles Comte, Proudhon says, proceeds from the indispensability of air,
food, and, in certain climates, clothing, not in order to live, but in
order not to stop living. Hence (according to Charles Comte) in order to
maintain himself, man constantly needs to appropriate things of various
kinds. These things do not all exist in the same proportion.

"The light of the heavenly bodies, air and water exist in such
quantities that man can neither increase nor decrease them appreciably;
hence everyone can appropriate as much of them as his needs require,
_without prejudice to the enjoyment of others"_.

Proudhon proceeds from Comte's own definitions. First of all he proves
to him that land is also an object of primary necessity, the usufruct of
which must therefore remain free to everyone, within the limits of
Comte's clause, namely: _"without prejudice to the enjoyment of
others."_ Why then has land become private property? Charles Comte
answers: because it is _not unlimited._ He should have concluded, on the
contrary, that because land is _limited_ it may not be appropriated. The
appropriation of air and water causes no prejudice to anybody because,
as they are unlimited, there is always enough left. The arbitrary
appropriation of land, on the other hand, prejudices the enjoyment of
others precisely because the land is _limited._ The use of the land must
therefore be regulated in the interests of _all_. Charles Comte's method
of proving refutes his own thesis.

"Charles Comte, so Proudhon" (the Critical one, of course) "reasons,
proceeds from the view that a nation can be the owner of a land; yet if
property involves the right to use and misuse -- jus utendi et abutendi
re sua -- even a nation cannot be adjudged the right to use and misuse a
land."

The real Proudhon does not speak of _jus utendi et abutendi_ that the
right of property "_involves_". He is too mass-minded to speak of a
right of property that the right of property involves. _Jus utendi et
abutendi re sua_ is, in fact, the right of property itself. Hence
Proudhon directly refuses a people the right of property over its
territory. To those who find that exaggerated, he replies that in all
epochs the imagined right of national property gave rise to suzerainty,
tribute, royal prerogatives, corvée, etc.

The real Proudhon reasons against Charles Comte as follows: Comte wishes
to expound how property arises and he begins with the hypothesis of a
nation as owner. He thus falls into a _petitio principii_. He makes the
state sell lands, he lets industrialists buy those estates, that is to
say, he presupposes the _property_ relations that he wishes to prove.

The Critical Proudhon scraps the French _decimal system_. He keeps the
_franc_ but replaces the _centime_ by the "_Dreier_'.

"If I cede a piece of land, Proudhon" (the Critical one) "continues, I
not only rob myself of one harvest; I deprive my children and children's
children of a lasting good. Land has value not only today, it has also
the value of its capacity and its future."

The real Proudhon does not speak of the fact that land has value not
only today but also tomorrow: he contrasts the full present value to the
value of its capacity and its future, which depends on my skill in
exploiting the land. He says:

"Destroy the land, or, what comes to the same thing for you, sell it;
you not only deprive yourself of one, two or more harvests; you
annihilate all the produce you could have obtained from it, you, your
children and your children's children."

For Proudhon the question is not one of stressing the contrast between
one harvest and the lasting good -- the money I get for the field can,
as capital, also become a "lasting good" -- but the contrast between the
present value and the value the land can acquire through continuous
cultivation.

"The new value, Charles Comte says, that I give to a thing by my work is
my property. Proudhon" (the Critical one) "thinks he can refute him in
the following way: _Then_ a man must cease to be a property-owner as
soon as he ceases to work. Ownership of the product can by no means
involve ownership of the material from which the product was made."

The real Proudhon says:

"Let the worker appropriate the products of his work, but I do not
understand how ownership of the products involves ownership of the
matter. Does the fisherman who manages to catch more fish than the
others on the same bank become by this skill the owner of the place
where he fishes! Was the skill of a hunter ever considered a title to
ownership of the game in a canton! The same applies to agriculture. In
order to transform _possession_ into _property, another condition_ is
necessary besides work, or a man would cease to be a property-owner as
soon as he ceased to be a worker."

_Cessante causa cessat effectus_. When the owner is owner only as a
worker, he ceases to be an owner as soon as he ceases to be a worker.

"According to _law_, it is _prescription_ which creates ownership;
_work_ is only the perceptible sign, the material act by which
occupation is _manifested_."

"The system of appropriation through work," Proudhon goes on, "is
therefore _contrary_ to law; and when the supporters of that system put
it forward as an explanation of the laws they are _contradicting
themselves_."

To say further, according to this opinion, that the cultivation of the
land, for example, "creates full ownership of the same" is a _petitio
principii._ It is a fact that a new productive capacity of the matter
has been created. But what has to be proved is that ownership of the
matter itself has thereby been created. Man has not created the matter
itself. And he cannot even create any productive capacity if the matter
does not exist beforehand.

The Critical Proudhon makes _Gracchus Babeuf_ a partisan of _freedom_,
but for the mass-minded Proudhon he is a partisan of _equality (partisan
de l'égalité)_.

The _Critical Proudhon_, who wanted to estimate _Homer's_ fee for the
_Iliad_, says:

"The fee which I pay Homer should be equal to what he gives me. But how
is the value of what he gives to be determined!"

The Critical Proudhon is too superior to the trifles of political
economy to know that the _value_ of an object and what that object gives
somebody else are two different things. The real Proudhon says:

"The fee of the poet should be equal to his product: what then is the
value of that product?"

The real Proudhon supposes that the _Iliad_ has an infinite _price_ (or
exchange value, prix), while the Critical Proudhon supposes that it has
an infinite _value_. The real Proudhon counterposes the value of the
_Iliad, its value_ in the _economic_ sense (_valeur intrinsque_), to its
exchange value (_valeur changeable_); the Critical Proudhon counterposes
its "value for exchange" to its "intrinsic value", i,e., its value as a
poem.

The real Proudhon says:

"Between material reward and talent there is no common measure. In this
respect the situation of all producers is the same. Consequently any
comparison between them, any classification according to fortune is
impossible." ("Entre une récompense matérielle et le talent il n'existe
pas de commune mesure; sous ce rapport la condition de tous les
producteurs est égale; conséquemment toute comparaison entre eux et
toute distinction de fortunes est impossible.")

The Critical Proudhon says:

"_Relatively_, the position of all producers is the same. Talent cannot
be weighed materially .... Any comparison of the producers among
themselves, any _external distinction_ is impossible."

In the Critical Proudhon we read that

"the man of science must feel himself equal in society, because his
talent and his insight are only a product of the insight of society".

The real Proudhon does not speak anywhere about the feelings of talent.
He says that talent must lower itself to the level of society. Nor does
he at all assert that the man of talent is only a product of society. On
the contrary, he says:

"The man of talent has contributed to produce in himself a useful
instrument .... There exist in him a free worker and an accumulated
social capital."

The Critical Proudhon goes on to say:

"Besides, he must be thankful to society for releasing him from other
work so that he can apply himself to science."

The real Proudhon nowhere resorts to the gratitude of the man of talent.
He says:

"The artist, the scientist, the poet, receive their just reward by the
mere fact that society allows them to apply themselves exclusively to
science and art."

Finally, the Critical Proudhon achieves the miracle of making a society
of 150 workers able to maintain a "_marshal_" and, therefore, probably,
an army. In the real Proudhon the marshal is a "_farrier" (maréchal_).


_Critical Comment No. 4_

"If he" (Proudhon) "retains the concept of wages, if he sees in society
an institution that gives us work and pays us for it, he has all the
less right to recognize time as the measure for payment as he but
shortly before, agreeing with Hugo Grotius, professed that time has no
bearing on the validity of an object."

This is the only point on which Critical Criticism attempts to solve its
problem and to prove to Proudhon that from the standpoint of political
economy he is arguing wrongly against political economy. Here Criticism
_disgraces_ itself in truly Critical fashion.

Proudhon agrees with Hugo Grotius in arguing that _prescription_ is no
title to change _possession into property_ or a "_legal principle_" into
another principle, any more than time can change the truth that the
three angles of a triangle are together equal to two right angles into
the truth that they are equal to three right angles.

"Never," exclaims Proudhon, "will you succeed in making length of time,
which of itself creates nothing, changes nothing, modifies nothing, able
to change the user into a proprietor."

Herr Edgar's conclusion is: since Proudhon said that mere time cannot
_change_ one legal principle into another, that by itself it cannot
change or modify anything, he is inconsistent when he makes _labour
time_ the measure of the economic value of the product of labour. Herr
Edgar achieves this Critically Critical remark by translating "valeur""
by "Geltung" so that he can use the word for validity of a legal
principle in the same sense as for the commercial value of a product of
labour. He achieves it by identifying empty length of time with time
filled with labour. Had Proudhon said that time cannot change a fly into
an elephant, Critical Criticism could have said with the same
justification: he has therefore no right to make labour time the measure
of wages.

Even Critical Criticism must be capable of grasping that the _labour
time expended_ on the production of an object is included in the _cost
of production_ of that object, that the _cost of production_ of an
object is what it _costs_, and therefore what it can be sold for,
abstraction being made of the influence of _competition_. Besides the
labour time and the material of labour, economists include in the cost
of production the rent paid to the owner of the land, interest and the
profit of the capitalist. The latter are excluded by Proudhon because he
excludes private property. Hence there remain only the labour time and
the expenses. By making labour time, the immediate existence of human
activity as activity, the measure of wages and the determinant of the
value of the product, Proudhon makes the human side the decisive factor.
In old political economy, on the other hand, the decisive factor was the
material power of capital and of landed property. In other words,
Proudhon reinstates man in his rights, but still in an economic and
therefore contradictory way. How right he is from the standpoint of
political economy can be seen from the fact that _Adam Smith_, the
founder of modern political economy, in the very first pages of his
book, _An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations_,
develops the idea that before the invention of private property, that is
to say, presupposing the _non-existence of private property, labour
time_ was the measure of _wages_ and of the _value of the product of
labour_, which was not yet distinguished from wages.

But even let Critical Criticism suppose for an instant that Proudhon did
not proceed from the premise of wages. Does it believe that the time
which the production of an object requires will ever not be an essential
factor in the "_validity_" of the object! Does it believe that time will
lose its _costliness_?

As far as immediate material production is concerned, the decision
whether an object is to be produced or not, i.e., the decision on the
_value_ of the object, will depend essentially on the labour time
required for its production. For it depends on time whether society has
time to develop in a human way.

And even as far as _intellectual_ production is concerned, must I not,
if I proceed reasonably in other respects, consider the time necessary
for the production of an intellectual work when I determine its scope,
its character and its plan? Otherwise I risk at least that the object
that is in my idea will never become an object in reality, and can
therefore acquire only the value of an imaginary object, i.e., an
_imaginary value_.

The criticism of political economy from the standpoint of political
economy recognizes all the essential determinants of human activity, but
only in an estranged, alienated form. Here, for example, it converts the
importance of time for _human labour_ into its importance for _wages_,
for wage-labour.

Herr Edgar continues:

"In order to force talent to accept that measure, Proudhon misuses the
concept of free contract and asserts that society and its individual
members have the right to reject the products of talent."

Among the _followers of Fourier and Saint-Simon_, talent puts forward
exaggerated _fee claims_ on an economic basis and makes its imagined
notion of its infinite value the measure of the _exchange value_ of its
products. Proudhon answers it in exactly the same way as political
economy answers any claim for a price much higher than the so-called
natural price, that is, higher than the cost of production of the object
offered. He answers by freedom of contract. But Proudhon does not
_misuse_ this relation in the sense of political economy; on the
contrary, he assumes that to be real which the economists consider to be
only nominal and illusory-the _freedom_ of the contracting parties.


_Characterizing Translation No. 4_

The Critical Proudhon finally reforms _French society_ by as deep a
transformation of the French proletarians as of the French bourgeoisie.

He denies the French proletarians "_strength_" because the real Proudhon
reproaches them with a lack of _virtue (vertu_). He makes their _skill_
in work problematic -- "you are _perhaps_ skilled in work" -- because
the real Proudhon unconditionally recognizes it ("_prompts au travail
vous êtes"_, etc.). He converts the French bourgeoisie into dull
burghers whereas the real Proudhon counterposes the ignoble bourgeois
(_bourgeois ignobles_) to the blemished nobles (_nobles flétris_). He
converts the bourgeois from happy-medium burghers (_bourgeois
juste-milieu_) into "our good burghers", for which the French
bourgeoisie can be grateful. Hence, where the real Proudhon says the
"ill will" of the French bourgeoisie (_la malveillance de nos
bourgeois)_ is growing, the Critical Proudhon consistently makes the
"_carefreeness_ of our burghers" grow. The real Proudhon's bourgeois is
so far from being carefree that he calls out to himself: _"N'ayons pas
peur! N'ayons pas peur!"_ Those are the words of a man who wishes to
reason himself out of fear and worry.

By creating the Critical Proudhon through its translation of the real
Proudhon, Critical Criticism has revealed to the Mass what a Critically
perfect translation is. It has given directions for "translation as it
ought to be". It is therefore rightly against bad, mass-type
translations.

"The German public wants the booksellers' wares ridiculously cheap, so
the publisher needs a cheap translation; the translator does not want to
starve at his work, he cannot even perform it with mature reflection"
(with all the tranquillity of knowledge) "because the publisher must
anticipate rivals by quick delivery of translations; even the translator
has to fear competition, has to fear that someone else will produce the
ware cheaper and quicker; he therefore dictates his manuscript offhand
to some poor scribe -- as quickly as he can in order not to pay the
scribe his hourly wage for nothing. He is more than happy when he can
next day adequately satisfy the harassing type-setter. For the rest, the
translations with which we are flooded are but a manifestation of the
present-day impotence of German literature", etc. (_Allgemeine
Literatur-Zeitung,_ Heft VIII, p.54.)


_Critical Comment No. 5_

"The proof of the impossibility of property that Proudhon draws from the
fact that mankind ruins itself particularly by the interest and profit
system and by the disproportion between consumption and production lacks
its counterpart, namely, the proof that private property is historically
possible."

Critical Criticism has the fortunate instinct not to go into Proudhon's
reasoning on the interest and profit system, etc., i.e., into the most
important part of his argument. The reason is that on this point not
even a semblance of criticism of Proudhon can be offered without
absolutely positive knowledge of the movement of private property.
Critical Criticism tries to make up for its impotence by observing that
Proudhon has not proved the historical possibility of property. Why does
Criticism, which has nothing but words to give, expect others to give it
_everything_?

"Proudhon proves the impossibility of property by the fact that the
worker cannot buy back the product of his work out of his wage. Proudhon
does not give an exhaustive proof of this by expounding the essence of
capital. The worker cannot buy back his product because it is always a
joint product, whereas he is never anything but an individual paid man."

Herr Edgar, in contrast to Proudhon's deduction, could have expressed
himself still more exhaustively to the effect that the worker cannot buy
back his product because in general he must _buy it back_. The
definition of buying already implies that he regards his product as an
object that is no longer his, an estranged object. Among other things,
Herr Edgar's exhaustive argument does not exhaust the question why the
capitalist, who himself is _nothing_ but an _individual_ man, and what
is more, a man _paid_ by profit and interest, can buy back not only the
product of labour, but still more than this product. To explain this
Herr Edgar would have to explain the relationship between labour and
capital, that is, to expound the essence of capital.

The above quotation from Criticism shows most palpably how Critical
Criticism immediately makes use of what it has learnt from a writer to
pass it off as wisdom it has itself discovered and use it with a
Critical twist against the same writer. For it is from Proudhon himself
that Critical Criticism drew the argument that it says Proudhon did not
give and that Herr Edgar did. Proudhon says:

"Divide et impera ... separate the workers from one another, and it is
quite possible that the daily wage paid to each one may exceed the value
of each individual product; but that is not the point at issue....
Although you have paid for all the individual powers you have still not
paid for the collective power."

Proudhon was the first to draw attention to the fact that the sum of the
wages of the individual workers, even if each individual labour be paid
for completely, does not pay for the collective power objectified in its
product, that therefore the worker is not paid as a part of the
_collective labour power [gemeinschaftlichen Arbeitskraft]_. Herr Edgar
twists this into the assertion that the worker is nothing but an
individual paid man. Critical Criticism thus opposes a _general_ thought
of Proudhon's to the further _concrete_ development that Proudhon
himself gives to the same thought. It takes possession of this thought
after the fashion of Criticism and expresses the secret of _Critical
socialism_ in the following sentence:

"The modern worker thinks only of himself, i.e., he allows himself to be
paid only for his own person. It is he himself who fails to take into
account the enormous, the immeasurable power which arises from his
co-operation with other powers."

According to Critical Criticism, the whole evil lies only in the
workers' "_thinking_". It is true that the English and French workers
have formed associations in which they exchange opinions not only on
their immediate needs as _workers_, but on their needs as human beings.
In their associations, moreover, they show a very thorough and
comprehensive consciousness of the "enormous" and "immeasurable" power
which arises from their co-operation. But these _mass-minded_, communist
workers, employed, for instance, in the Manchester or Lyons workshops,
do not believe that by "_pure thinking_" they will be able to argue away
their industrial masters and their own practical debasement. They are
most painfully aware of the _difference_ between _being_ and _thinking_,
between _consciousness_ and _life_. They know that property, capital,
money, wage-labour and the like are no ideal figments of the brain but
very practical, very objective products of their self-estrangement and
that therefore they must be abolished in a practical, objective way for
man to become man not only in _thinking_, in _consciousness_, but in
mass _being_, in life. Critical Criticism, on the contrary, teaches them
that they cease in reality to be wage-workers if in thinking they
abolish the thought of wage-labour; if in thinking they cease to regard
themselves as wage-workers and, in accordance with that extravagant
notion, no longer let themselves be paid for their person. As absolute
idealists, as ethereal beings, they will then naturally be able to live
on the ether of pure thought. Critical Criticism teaches them that they
abolish real capital by overcoming in _thinking_ the category Capital,
that they _really_ change and transform themselves into real human
beings by changing their "_abstract ego_" in consciousness and scorning
as an un-Critical operation all real change of their real existence, of
the real conditions of their existence, that is to say, of their _real
ego_. The "_spirit_", which sees in reality only categories, naturally
reduces all human activity and practice to the dialectical process of
thought of Critical Criticism. That is what distinguishes its socialism
from _mass-type_ socialism and communism.

After his great argumentation, Herr Edgar must, of course, declare
Proudhon's criticism "devoid of consciousness".

"Proudhon, however, wishes to be practical too." "He thinks he has
grasped." "And nevertheless," cries the tranquillity of knowledge
triumphantly, "we cannot even now credit him with the tranquillity of
knowledge." "We quote a few passages to show how little he has thought
out his attitude to society."

Later we shall also quote a few passages from the works of Critical
Criticism (see the _Bank for the Poor_ and the _Model Farm_) to show
that it has not yet become acquainted with the most elementary economic
relationships, let alone thought them out, and hence with its
characteristic Critical tact has felt itself called upon to pass
judgment on Proudhon.

Now that Critical Criticism as the tranquillity of knowledge has _"made"
all the mass-type "antitheses its concern",_ has mastered all reality in
the form of categories and dissolved all human activity into speculative
dialectics, we shall see it produce the world again out of speculative
dialectics. It goes without saying that if the miracles of the
Critically speculative creation of the world are not to be "desecrated",
they can be presented to the profane mass only in the form of
_mysteries_. Critical Criticism therefore appears in the incarnation of
Vishnu-Szeliga as a _mystery-monger_.

Chapter V “Critical Criticism” As a Mystery-Monger, Or “Critical Criticism” As Herr Szeliga

“Critical Criticism" in its _Szeliga-Vishnu_ incarnation provides an
apotheosis of the Mystéres de Paris. Eugéne Sue is proclaimed a
"Critical Critic". Hearing this, he may exclaim like Moliére's
_Bourgeois gentilhomme_:

"_Par ma foi, il y a plus de quarante ans que je dis de la prose, sans
que j'en susse rien: et je vous suis le plus obligé du monde de m'avoir
appris cela._"

Herr Szeliga prefaces his criticism with an _aesthetic_ prologue. "The
aesthetic prologue" gives the following explanation of the general
meaning of the "Critical" epic and in particular of the _Mystéres de
Paris_:

"The epic gives rise to the thought that the present in itself is
nothing, and not only" (nothing and not only!) "the eternal boundary
between past and future, but" (nothing, and not only, but) "but the gap
that separates immortality from transience and must continually be
filled.... Such is the _general meaning of the Mystéres de Paris._"

The "aesthetic prologue" further asserts that "if the Critic wished he
could also be a _poet_".

The whole of Herr Szeliga's criticism will prove that assertion. It is
"_poetic fiction_” in every respect.

It is also a product of "free art" according to the definition of the
latter given in the "aesthetic prologue" — it "invents _something quite
new, something that absolutely never existed before_”.

Finally, it is even a _Critical epic_, for it is "the gap that separates
immortality" — Herr Szeliga's Critical Criticism — from "transience" —
Eugéne Sue's novel — and "must continually be filled".

1) "The Mystery of Degeneracy in Civilisation" and "The Mystery of Rightlessness in the State"

_Feuerbach_, we know, conceived the Christian ideas of the Incarnation,
the Trinity, Immortality, etc., as the mystery of the Incarnation, the
mystery of the Trinity, the mystery of Immortality. Herr Szeliga
conceives all present world conditions as mysteries. But whereas
_Feuerbach_ disclosed _real mysteries,_ Herr _Szeliga_ makes _mysteries_
out of real _trivialities._ His art is not that of disclosing what is
hidden, but of hiding what is disclosed.

Thus he proclaims as _mysteries_ degeneracy (criminals) within
civilisation and rightlessness and inequality in the state. This means
that socialist literature, which has revealed these mysteries, is still
a mystery to Herr Szeliga, or that he wants to convert the best-known
findings of that literature into a private mystery of "Critical
Criticism."

We therefore need not go more deeply into Herr Szeliga's discourse on
these mysteries; we shall merely draw attention to a few of the most
brilliant points.

"Before the law and the judge everything is _equal_, the high and the
low, the rich and the poor. This proposition stands at the head of the
credo of _the state_."

Of the state? The credo of most states starts, on the contrary, by
making the high and the low, the rich and the poor _unequal_ before the
_law._

"The gem-cutter Morel in his naive probity most clearly expresses the
mystery" (the mystery of the antithesis of poor and rich) "when he says:
If only the rich knew! If only the rich knew! The misfortune is that
they do not know what poverty is."

Herr Szeliga does not know that Eugéne Sue commits an _anachronism_ out
of courtesy to the French bourgeoisie when he puts the motto of the
burghers of Louis XIV's time "_Ah! si le roi le savait!_" in a modified
form: "_Ah! si le riche le savait!_" into the mouth of the working man
Morel who lived at the time of the _Charte vérité_" In England and
France, at least, this _naive_ relation between rich and poor has ceased
to exist. There the scientific representatives of wealth, the
economists, have spread a very detailed understanding of the physical
and moral misery of poverty. They have made up for that by proving that
misery must remain because the present state of things must remain. In
their solicitude they have even calculated the _proportions_ in which
the poor must be reduced in number by deaths for the good of the rich
and for their own welfare.

If Eugene Sue depicts the taverns, hide-outs and language of
_criminals_, Herr Szeliga discloses the "_mystery_” that what the
"author" wanted was not to depict that language or those hide-outs, but

"to teach us the mystery of the mainsprings of evil, etc." "It is
precisely in the most crowded places ... that criminals feel at _home_."

What would a natural scientist say if one were to prove to him that the
bee's cell does not interest him as a bee's cell, that it has no mystery
for one who has not studied it, because the bee "feels at home
precisely" in the open air and on the flower? The hide-outs of the
criminals and their language reflect the character of the criminal, they
are part of his existence, their description is part of his description
just as the description of the _petite maison_ is part of the
description of the _femme galante_.

For Parisians in general and even for the Paris police the hide-outs of
criminals are such a "mystery" that at this very moment broad light
streets are being laid out in the _Cité_' to give the police access to
them.

Finally, Eugéne Sue himself states that in the descriptions mentioned
above he was counting "_sur la curiosité, craintive_" of his readers. M.
Eugéne Sue has counted on the timid curiosity of his readers in all his
novels. It is sufficient to recall _Atar Gull, Salamandre, Plick and
Plock_, etc.

2) The Mystery of Speculative Construction

The mystery of the Critical presentation of the _Mystéres de Paris_ is
the mystery of _speculative_, of _Hegelian construction_. Once Herr
Szeliga has proclaimed that "degeneracy within civilisation" and
rightlessness in the state are "mysteries", i.e., has dissolved them in
the category "_mystery_", he lets "mystery" begin its _speculative
career_. A few words will suffice to characterise speculative
construction _in general_. Herr Szeliga's treatment of the _Mystéres de
Paris_ will give the application in _detail_.

If from real apples, pears, strawberries and almonds I form the general
idea "_Fruit_”, if I go further and _imagine_ that my abstract idea
"_Fruit_”, derived from real fruit, is an entity existing outside me, is
indeed the true essence of the pear, the apple, etc., then in the
_language of speculative_ philosophy — I am declaring that "_Fruit_” is
the "_Substance_” of the pear, the apple, the almond, etc. I am saying,
therefore, that to be a pear is not essential to the pear, that to be an
apple is not essential to the apple; that what is essential to these
things is not their real existence, perceptible to the senses, but the
essence that I have abstracted from them and then foisted on them, the
essence of my idea — "_Fruit_”. I therefore declare apples, pears,
almonds, etc., to be mere forms of existence, _modi_, of "_Fruit_” My
finite understanding supported by my senses does of course _distinguish_
an apple from a pear and a pear from an almond, but my speculative
reason declares these sensuous differences inessential and irrelevant.
It sees in the apple _the same_ as in the pear, and in the pear the same
as in the almond, namely "_Fruit_”. Particular real fruits are no more
than semblances whose true essence is "_the_ substance" — "_Fruit_”.

By this method one attains no particular _wealth of definition_. The
mineralogist whose whole science was limited to the statement that all
minerals are really "_the_ Mineral" would be a mineralogist only in _his
imagination_. For every mineral the speculative mineralogist Says "the
Mineral", and his science is reduced to repeating this word as many
times as there are real minerals.

Having reduced the different real fruits to the _one_ "fruit" of
abstraction — "_the_ Fruit", speculation must, in order to attain some
semblance of real content, try somehow to find its way back from "_the_
Fruit", from the _Substance_ to the _diverse_, ordinary real fruits, the
pear, the apple, the almond, etc. It is as hard to produce real fruits
from the abstract idea "_the_ Fruit" as it is easy to produce this
abstract idea from real fruits. Indeed, it is impossible to arrive at
the opposite of an abstraction without relinquishing the abstraction.

The speculative philosopher therefore relinquishes the abstraction
"_the_ Fruit", but in a _speculative, mystical_ fashion — with the
appearance of _not_ relinquishing it. Thus it is really only in
appearance that he rises above his abstraction. He argues somewhat as
follows:

If apples, pears, almonds and strawberries are really nothing but "_the_
Substance", "_the_ Fruit", the question arises: Why does "_the_ Fruit"
manifest itself to me sometimes as an apple, sometimes as a pear,
sometimes as an almond? Why this _semblance of diversity_ which so
obviously contradicts my speculative conception of _Unity_, "_the_
Substance", "_the_ Fruit"?

This, answers the speculative philosopher, is because "_the_ Fruit" is
not dead, undifferentiated, motionless, but a living,
self-differentiating, moving essence. The diversity of the ordinary
fruits is significant not only for my sensuous understanding, but also
for "_the_ Fruit" itself and for speculative reason. The different
ordinary fruits are different manifestations of the life of the "one
Fruit"; they are crystallisations of "_the_ Fruit" itself. Thus in the
apple "_the_ Fruit" gives itself an apple-like existence, in the pear a
pear-like existence. We must therefore no longer say, as one might from
the standpoint of the Substance: a pear is "_the_ Fruit", an apple is
"_the_ Fruit", an almond is "_the_ Fruit", but rather "_the_ Fruit"
presents itself as a pear, "_the_ Fruit" presents itself as an apple,
"_the_ Fruit" presents itself as an almond; and the differences which
distinguish apples, pears and almonds from one another are the
self-differentiations of "_the_ Fruit" and,.make the particular fiuits
different members of the life-process of "_the_ Fruit". Thus "_the_
Fruit" is no longer an empty undifferentiated unity; it is oneness as
_allness,_ as "_totality_” of fruits, which constitute an "_organically
linked series of members_”. In every member of that series "_the_ Fruit"
gives itself a more developed, more explicit existence, until finally,
as the "_summary_” of all fruits, it is at the same time the living
_unity_ which contains all those fruits dissolved in itself just as it
produces them from within itself, just as, for instance, all the limbs
of the body are constantly dissolved in and constantly produced out of
the blood.

We see that if the Christian religion knows only _one_ Incarnation of
God, speculative philosophy has as many incarnations as there are
things, just as it has here in every fruit an incarnation of the
Substance, of the Absolute Fruit. The main interest for the speculative
philosopher is therefore to produce the _existence_ of the real ordinary
fruits and to say in some mysterious way that there are apples, pears,
almonds and raisins. But the apples, pears, almonds and raisins that we
rediscover in the speculative world are nothing but _semblances_ of
apples, _semblances_ of pears, _semblances_ of almonds and _semblances_
of raisins, for they are moments in the life of "_the_ Fruit", this
abstract creation of the mind, and therefore themselves abstract
_creations of the mind_. Hence what is delightful in this speculation is
to rediscover all the real fruits there, but as fruits which have a
higher mystical significance, which have grown out of the ether of your
brain and not out of the material earth, which are incarnations of
"_the_ Fruit", of the _Absolute Subject_. When you return from the
abstraction, the _supernatural_ creation of the mind, "_the_ Fruit", to
real _natural_ fruits, you give on the contrary the natural fruits a
supernatural significance and transform them into sheer abstractions.
Your main interest is then to point out the _unity_ of "_the_ Fruit" in
all the manifestations of its life — the apple, the pear, the almond —
that is, to show the _mystical interconnection_ between these fruits,
how in each one of them "_the_ Fruit" realises itself by _degrees_ and
_necessarily_ progresses, for instance, from its existence as a raisin
to its existence as an almond. Hence the value of the ordinary fruits
_no longer_ consists in their _natural_ qualities, _but_ in their
_speculative_ quality, which gives each of them a definite place in the
life-process of "_the_ Absolute Fruit"

The ordinary man does not think he is saying anything extraordinary when
he states that there are apples and pears. But when the philosopher
expresses their existence in the speculative way he says something
_extraordinary_. He performs a _miracle_ by producing the real _natural
objects_, the apple, the pear, etc., out of the unreal _creation of the
mind_ "_the_ Fruit", i.e., by _creating_ those fruits out of his _own
abstract reason_, which he considers as an Absolute Subject outside
himself, represented here as "_the_ Fruit". And in regard to every
object the existence of which he expresses, he accomplishes an act of
creation.

It goes without saying that the speculative philosopher accomplishes
this continuous creation only by presenting universally known qualities
of the apple, the pear, etc., which exist in reality, as determining
features _invented_ by him, by giving the _names_ of the real things to
what abstract reason alone can create, to abstract formulas of reason,
finally, by declaring his _own_ activity, by which _he passes_ from the
idea of an apple to the idea of a pear, to be the _self-activity_ of the
Absolute Subject, "the Fruit"

In the speculative way of speaking, this operation is called
comprehending _Substance as Subject_, as an _inner process_, as an
_Absolute Person,_ and this comprehension constitutes the essential
character of _Hegel's_ method.

These preliminary remarks were necessary to make Herr Szeliga
intelligible. Only now, after dissolving real relations, e.g., law and
civilisation, in the category of mystery and thereby making
"_Mystery_”(das Geheimnis) into Substance, does he rise to the true
speculative, _Hegelian_ height and transforms "_Mystery_” into a
self-existing Subject _incarnating_ itself in real situations and
persons so that the manifestations of its life are countesses,
marquises, grisettes, porters, notaries, charlatans, and love intrigues,
balls, wooden doors, etc. Having produced the category "_Mystery_” out
of the real world, he produces the real world out of this category.

The mysteries of _speculative construction_ in Herr Szeliga's
presentation will be all the _more visibly_ disclosed as he has an
indisputable _double_ advantage over _Hegel_. On the one hand, Hegel
with masterly sophistry is able to present as a process of the imagined
creation of the mind itself, of the Absolute Subject, the process by
which the philosopher through sensory perception and imagination passes
from one subject to another. On the other hand, however, Hegel very
often gives a _real_ presentation, embracing the _thing_ itself, within
the _speculative_ presentation. This real development _within_ the
speculative development misleads the reader into considering the
speculative development as real and the real as speculative.

With Herr Szeliga both these difficulties vanish. His dialectics have no
hypocrisy or dissimulation. He performs his tricks with the most
laudable honesty and the most ingenuous straightforwardness. But then he
_nowhere_ develops any _real content_, so that his speculative
construction is free from all disturbing accessories, from all ambiguous
disguises, and appeals to the eye in its naked beauty. In Herr Szeliga
we also see a brilliant illustration of how speculation on the one hand
apparently freely creates its object _a priori_ out of itself and, on
the other hand, precisely because it wishes to get rid by sophistry of
the rational and natural dependence on the _object_, falls into the most
irrational and unnatural _bondage_ to the object, whose most accidental
and most individual attributes it is obliged to construe as absolutely
necessary and general.

3) "The Mystery of Educated Society"

After leading us through the lowest strata of society, for example
through the criminals' taverns, Eugene Sue transports us to "_haute
volee_”,' to a _ball_ in the Quartier Saint-Germain.

This _transition_ Herr Szeliga construes as follows:

"_Mystery_ tries to evade examination by a ... twist: so far it appeared
as the absolutely enigmatic, elusive and negative, in contrast to the
true, real and positive; now it withdraws into the latter as its
_invisible_ content. But by doing so it gives up the unconditional
possibility of becoming known."

"Mystery" which has so far appeared in contrast to the "true", the
"real", the "positive", that is, to law and education, "now withdraws
into the latter", that is, into the realm of education. It is certainly
a _mystere_ for Paris, if not of Paris, that "_haute volee_" is the
exclusive realm of education. Herr Szeliga does not pass from the
mysteries of the criminal world to those of aristocratic society;
instead, "_Mystery_” becomes the "invisible content" of educated
society, its _real essence_. It is "_not a new twist_" of Herr Szeliga's
designed to enable him to proceed to further examination; "_Mystery_”
itself takes this "new twist" in order to escape examination.

Before really following Eugene Sue where his heart leads him - to an
aristocratic ball, Herr Szeliga resorts to the _hypocritical_ twists of
speculation which makes _a priori_ constructions.

"One can _naturally foresee_ what a solid shell 'Mystery' will _choose_
to hide in; _it seems, in fact_, that it is of _insuperable
impenetrability_ ... that ... _hence_ it may _be expected_ that in
_general_ ... _nevertheless_ a new attempt to pick out the kernel is
_here indispensable_."

Enough. Herr Szeliga has gone so far that the

"_metaphysical_ subject, _Mystery_, now steps forward, light,
self-confident and jaunty".

In order now to change aristocratic society into a "mystery", Herr
Szeliga gives us a few considerations on "_education_". He presumes
aristocratic society to have all sorts of qualities that no man would
look for in it, in order later to find the "mystery" that it does not
possess those qualities. Then he presents this discovery as the
"mystery" of educated society. Herr Szeliga wonders, for example,
whether "_general_ reason" (does he mean speculative logic?) constitutes
the content of its "_drawing-room talk_", whether "the _rhythm_ and
_measure_ of love _alone_ makes" it a "harmonious whole", whether "what
we call _general education_ is the form of the _general, the eternal,
the ideal_", i.e., whether what we call education is a metaphysical
illusion. It is not difficult for Herr Szeliga to prophesy _a priori_ in
answer to his questions:

"It is to be _expected, however_ ... that the answer will be in the
negative."

In Eugene Sue's novel, the transition from the low world to the
aristocratic world is a normal transition for a novel. The _disguises of
Rudolph_, Prince of Geroldstein, give him entry into the lower strata of
society as his title gives him access to the highest circles. On his way
to the aristocratic ball he is by no means engrossed in the contrasts of
contemporary life; it is the contrasts of his own disguises that he
finds _piquant_. He informs his obedient companions how extraordinarily
interesting he finds himself in the various situations.

"Je trouve," he says, "assez de piquant dans ces contrastes: un jour
peintre en éventails, m'établant dans un bouge de la rue aux Fèves; ce
matin commis marchand offrant un verre de cassis à Madame Pipelet, et ce
soir ... un des privilégiés par la grâce de dieu, qui règnent sur ce
monde."

When Critical Criticism is ushered into the ball-room, it sings:

Sense and reason forsake me near,
In the midst of the potentates here!

It pours forth in _dithyrambs_ as follows:

"Here magic brings the brilliance of the sun at night, the verdure of
spring and the splendour of summer in winter. We immediately feel in a
mood to believe in the miracle of the divine presence in the breast of
man, especially when beauty and grace uphold the conviction that we are
in the immediate proximity of ideals." (!!!)

Inexperienced, credulous _Critical country parson_! Only your Critical
ingenuousness can be raised by an elegant Parisian ball-room "to a mood"
in which you believe in "the miracle of the divine presence in the
breast of man", and see in Parisian lionesses "immediate ideals" and
angels corporeal!

In his _unctuous_ naivety the Critical parson listens to the two "most
beautiful among the beautiful", Clemence d'Harville and Countess Sarah
MacGregor. One can guess what he wishes to "_hear_" from them:

"In what way we can be the _blessing_ of beloved children and the
'_fullness_ of happiness of a husband"!... "We hark ... we wonder ... we
do not trust our ears."

We secretly feel a malicious pleasure when the listening parson is
disappointed. The ladies converse neither about "blessing", nor
"fullness", nor "general reason", but about "an infidelity of Madame
d'Harville to her husband".

We get the following naive revelation about one of the ladies, Countess
MacGregor:

She was "_enterprising enough_ to become _mother to a child as the
result_ of a secret marriage".

Unpleasantly affected by the

of the Countess, Herr Szeliga has sharp words for her:

"We find that all the strivings of the Countess are for her personal,
selfish advantage."

Indeed, he expects nothing good from the attainment of her purpose -
marriage to the Prince of Geroldstein:

"concerning which we can _by no means_ expect that she will avail
herself of it for the _happiness_ of the Prince of Geroldstein's
_subjects_."

The puritan ends his admonitory sermon with "profound earnestness":

"Sarah" (the _enterprising_ lady), "_incidentally, is hardly_ an
exception in this brilliant circle, _although_ she is one of its
_summits_."

Incidentally, hardly! Although! And is not the "summit" of a circle an
exception?

Here is what we learn about the character of two other ideals, the
Marquise d'Harville and the Duchess of Lucenay:

They "'lack satisfaction of the heart'. They have not found in marriage
the object of love, so they seek it outside marriage. In marriage, love
has remained a _mystery_ for them, and the imperative urge of the heart
drives them to unravel this mystery. So they give themselves up to
_secret love_. These 'victims' of 'loveless marriage' are 'driven
against their will to debase love to something external, to a so-called
affair, and take the romantic, the _secrecy_, for the internal, the
vivifying, the essential element of love'".

The merit of this dialectical reasoning is to be assessed all the higher
as it is of more general application.

He, for example, who is not allowed to _drink_ at home and yet feels the
need to drink looks for the "object" of drinking "_outside_" the house,
and "so" takes to _secret drinking_. Indeed, he will be driven to
consider secrecy an essential ingredient of drinking, although he will
not debase drink to a mere "external" indifferent thing, any more than
those ladies did with love. For, according to Herr Szeliga himself, it
is not love, but marriage without love, that they debase to what it
really is, to something external, to a so-called affair.

Herr Szeliga goes on to ask: "What is the '_mystery_' of love?"

We have just had the speculative construction that "mystery" is the
"_essence_" of this kind of love. How is it that we now come to be
looking for the mystery of the mystery, the essence of the essence?

"Not the shady paths in the thickets," declaims the parson, "not the
_natural_ semi-obscurity of moonlight night nor the artificial
semi-obscurity of costly curtains and draperies; not the soft and
enrapturing notes of the harps and the organs, not the attraction of
what is forbidden...."

Curtains and draperies! Soft and enrapturing notes! Even the _organ_!
Let the reverend parson stop thinking of _church_! Who would bring an
organ to a love tryst?

"All this" (curtains, draperies and organs) "is only the mysterious."

And is not the mysterious the "mystery" of mysterious love? By no means:

"The mysterious in it is what excites, what intoxicates, what
enraptures, the _power of sensuality_."

In the "soft and _enrapturing_" notes, the parson already had what
enraptures. Had he brought turtle soup and champagne to his love tryst
instead of curtains and organs, the "_exciting and intoxicating_" would
have been present too.

"It is true we do not like to admit," the reverend gentleman argues,
"the power of sensuality; but it has such tremendou's power over us only
because we cast it out of us and will not recognise it as our own
nature, which we should then be in a position to dominate if it tried to
assert itself at the expense of reason, of true love and of will-power."

The parson advises us, after the fashion of speculative theology, to
_recognise_ sensuality as our _own_ nature, in order afterwards to be
able to _dominate_ it, i.e., to retract recognition of it. True, he
wishes to dominate it only when it tries to assert itself at the expense
of _Reason_ - will-power and love as _opposed_ to sensuality are only
the will-power and love of _Reason_. The unspeculative Christian also
recognises _sensuality_ as long as it does not assert itself at the
expense of true reason, i.e., of faith, of true love, i.e., of love of
God, of true will-power, i.e., of will in Christ.

The parson immediately betrays his real meaning when he continues:

"If then love ceases to be the essential element of marriage and of
morality in general, _sensuality_ becomes the mystery of love, of
morality, of educated society - sensuality both in its _narrow_ meaning,
in which it is a _trembling in the nerves_ and a _burning stream_ in the
veins, and in the broader meaning, in which it is elevated to a
_semblance_ of spiritual power, to lust for power, ambition, craving for
glory.... Countess MacGregor represents" the latter meaning "of
sensuality as the mystery of educated society."

The parson hits the nail on the head. To overcome _sensuality_ he must
first of all overcome the _nerve currents_ and the quick _circulation of
the blood_.- Herr Szeliga believes in the "narrow" meaning that greater
warmth in the body comes from the heat of the blood in the veins; he
does not know that _warm-blooded animals_ are so called because the
temperature of their blood, apart from slight modifications, always
remams at a constant level.- As soon as there is no more nerve current
and the blood in the veins is no longer hot, the _sinful body_, this
seat of sensual lust, becomes a _corpse_ and the souls can converse
unhindered about "general reason", "true love", and "pure morals". The
parson debases sensuality to such an extent that he abolishes the very
elements of sensual love which inspire it - the rapid circulation of the
blood, which proves that man does not love by insensitive phlegm; the
nerve currents which connect the organ that is the main seat of
sensuality with the brain. He reduces true sensual love to the
_mechanical secretio_ seminis and lisps with a notorious German
theologian:

"Not for the sake of sensual love, not for the lust of the flesh, but
because the Lord said: Increase and multiply."

Let us now compare the speculative construction with Eugene Sue's novel.
It is not _sensuality_ which is presented as the secret of love, but
mysteries, adventures, obstacles, fears, dangers, and especially the
attraction of what is forbidden.

"Pourquoi," says Eugene Sue, "beaucoup de femmes prennent-elles pourtant
des hommes qui ne valent pas leurs maris? Parce que le plus grand chenne
de l'amour est l'attrait affriandant du fruit défendu ... avancez que,
en retranchant de cet amour les craintes, les angoisses, les
difficultés, les mystères, les dangers, il ne reste rien ou peu de
chose, c'est-à-dire, l'amant ... dans sa simplicité première ... en un
mot, ce serait toujours plus ou moins l'aventure de cet homme à qui l'on
disait: 'Pourquoi n'épousez-vous donc pas cette veuve, votre maîtresse?'
- 'Hélas, j'y ai bien pensé' - répondit-il' - 'mais alors je ne saurais
plus où aller passer mes soirées.'"

Whereas Herr Szeliga says explicitly that the mystery of love is not in
the _attraction of what is forbidden_, Eugene Sue says just as
explicitly that it is the "greatest charm of love" and the reason for
all love adventures _extra muros_.

"La prohibition et la contrebande sont inseparables en amour comme en
marchandise."

Eugene Sue similarly maintains, contrary to his speculative commentator,
that

"the propensity to pretence and craft, the liking for mysteries and
intrigues, is an essential quality, a natural propensity and an
imperative instinct of woman's nature".

The only thing which embarrasses Eugene Sue is that this propensity and
this liking are directed against _marriage._ He would like to give the
instincts of woman's nature a more harmless, more useful application.

Herr Szeliga makes Countess MacGregor a representative of the kind of
_sensuality_ which "is elevated to a semblance of spiritual power", but
in Eugene Sue she is a _person of abstract reason_. Her "ambition" and
her "pride", far from being forms of sensuality, are born of an abstract
reason which is completely independent of sensuality. That is why Eugene
Sue explicitly notes that

"the fiery impulses of love could never make her icy breast heave; no
surprise of the heart or the senses could upset the pitiless
calculations of this crafty, selfish, ambitious woman".

This woman's essential character lies in the egoism of abstract reason
that never suffers from the sympathetic senses and on which the blood
has no influence. Her soul is therefore described as "dry and hard", her
mind as "artfully wicked", her character as "treacherous" and - what is
very typical of a person of abstract reason - as "absolute", her
dissimulation as "profound".- It is to be noted incidentally that Eugene
Sue motivates the career of the Countess just as stupidly as that of
most of his characters. An old nurse gives her the idea that she must
become a "crowned head". Convinced of this, she undertakes journeys to
capture a crown through marriage. Finally she commits the inconsistency
of considering a petty German "_Serenissimus_” as a "crowned head".

After his outpourings against _sensuality_, our Critical saint deems it
necessary to show why Eugene Sue introduces us to _haute volee_ at a
ball, a method which is used by nearly all French novelists, whereas the
_English_ do so more often at the chase or in a country mansion.

"For this" (i.e., Herr Szeliga's) "conception it cannot be indifferent
there" (in Herr Szeliga's construction) "and merely accidental that
Eugene Sue introduces us to high society at a ball."

Now the horse has been given a free rein and it trots briskly towards
the necessary end through a series of conclusions reminding one of the
late Wolff.

"_Dancing_ is the most common manifestation of _sensuality as a
mystery_. The immediate _contact_, the embracing of the two sexes" (?)
"necessary to form a couple are allowed in dancing because, in spite of
appearances, and the really" (really, Mr. Parson?) "perceptible pleasant
sensation, it is not considered as _sensual_ contact and embracing" (but
probably as connected with universal reason?).

And then comes a closing sentence which at best staggers rather than
dances:

"For if it were in actual fact considered as such it would be impossible
to understand tuhy society is so lenient only as regards dancing while
it, on the contrary, so severely condemns that which, if exhibited with
similar freedom elsewhere, incurs branding and merciless casting out as
a most unpardonable offence against morals and modesty."

The reverend parson speaks here neither of the _cancan_ nor of the
_polka_, but of _dancing_ in general, of the _category_ Dancing, which
is not performed anywhere except in his Critical cranium. Let him see a
dance at the Chaumiere in Paris, and his Christian-German soul would be
outraged by the boldness, the frankness, the graceful petulance and the
music of that most sensual movement. His own "really perceptible
pleasant sensation" would make it "perceptible" to him that "in actual
fact it would be impossible to understand why the dancers themselves,
while on the contrary they" give the spectator the uplifting impression
of frank human sensuality - "which, if exhibited in the same way
elsewhere" - namely in Germany - "would be severely condemned as an
unpardonable offence", etc., etc.- why those dancers, at least so to
speak in their own eyes, not only should not and may not, but of
necessity canot and must not be frankly sensual hurnan beings!!

The Critic introduces us to the _ball_ for the sake of the _essence of
dancing_. He encounters a great difficulty. True, there is dancing at
this ball, but only in imagination. The fact is that Eugene Sue does not
say a word describing the dancing. He does not mix among the throng of
dancers. He makes use of the ball only as an opportunity for bringing
together his characters from the upper aristocracy. In despair,
"Criticism" comes to help out and _supplement_ the author, and its own
"fancy" easily provides a description of ball incidents, etc. If, as
prescribed by Criticism, Eugene Sue was not directly interested in the
criminals' hide-outs and language when he described them, the dance, on
the other hand, which _not he_ but his "fanciful" Critic describes,
necessarily interests him infinitely.

Let us continue.

"_Actually_, the secret of sociable tone and tact - the secret of that
extremely unnatural thing - is the longing to return to nature. That is
why the appearance of a person like _Cecily_ in educated society has
such an electrifying effect and is crowned with such extraordinary
success. She grew up a slave among slaves, without any education, and
the only source of life she has to rely upon is her -nature. Suddenly
transported to a court and subjected to its constraint and customs, she
soon learns to see through the secret of the latter.... In this sphere,
which she can undoubtedly hold in sway because her power, the power of
her nature, has an enigmatic magic, Cecily must necessarily stray into
losing all sense of measure, whereas formerly, when she was still a
slave, the same nature taught her to resist any unworthy demand of the
powerful master and to remain true to her love. _Cecily is the mystery
of educated society disclosed_. The scorned senses finally break down
the barriers and surge forth completely uncurbed", etc.

Those of Herr Szeliga's readers who have not read Sue's novel will
certainly think that Cecily is the lioness of the ball that is
described. In the novel she is in a German gaol while the dancing goes
on in Paris.

Cecily, as a slave, remains true to the Negro doctor David because she
loves him "passionately" and because her owner, Mr. Willis, is
"_brutal_" in courting her. The reason for her change to a dissolute
life is a very simple one. Transported into the "European world", she
"blushes" at being "married to a Negro". On arriving in Germany she is
"_at once_” seduced by a wicked man and her "Indian blood" comes into
its own. This the hypocritical M. Sue, for the sake of _douce morale_
and _doux commerce_, is bound to describe as "perversité naturelle"."

The secret of Cecily is that she is a _half-breed_. The secret of her
sensuality is the _heat of the tropics_. Parny sang praises of the
half-breed in his beautiful lines to Eleonore. Over a hundred sea-faring
tales tell us how dangerous she is to sailors.

"Cecily était le type incarné de la sensualité brûlante, qui ne s'allume
qu'au feu des tropiques.... Tout le monde a entendu parler de ces filles
de couleur, pour ainsi dire mortelles aux Européens, de ces vampyrs
enchanteurs, qui, enivrant leurs victimes de séductions terribles ... ne
lui laissent, selon l'énergique expression du pays, que ses larmes à
boire, que son coeur à ronger."

Cecily was far from producing such a magical effect precisely on people
aristocratically educated, blasé...

"les femmes de l'espèce de Cecily exercent une action soudaine, une
omnipotence magique sur les hommes de sensualité brutale tels que
Jacques Ferrand".

Since when have men like Jacques Ferrand been representative of fine
society? But Critical Criticism must speculatively make _Cecily_ a
factor in the life-process of Absolute Mystery.

4) "The Mystery of Probity and Piety"

"_Mystery, as that_ of educated society, withdraws, _it is true_, from
the _antithesis_ into the _inner_ sphere. _Nevertheless_, high society
_once again_ has exclusively _its own_ circles in which it preserves the
holy. It is, _as it were_, the chapel for this holy of holies. But for
people in the forecourt, the chapel itself is the _mystery_. Education,
_therefore_, in its exclusive position is the same thing for the people
... as vulgarity is for the educated."

_It is true, nevertheless, once again, as it arere, but, therefore_ -
those are the magic hooks which hold together the links of the chain of
_speculative reasoning_. Herr Szeliga has made _Mystery_ withdraw from
the world of criminals into high society. Now he has to construct the
mystery that high society has its _exclusive_ circles and that the
mysteries of those circles are mysteries for the people. Besides the
magic hooks already mentioned, this construction requires the
transformation of a _circle_ into a _chapel_ and the transformation of
non-aristocratic society into a _forecourt_ of that chapel. Again it is
a mystery _for_ Paris that all the spheres of bourgeois society are only
a forecourt of the chapel of high society.

Herr Szeliga pursues two aims. Firstly, _Mystery_ which has become
incarnate in the exclusive circle of high society must be declared
"_common property of the world_”. Secondly, the _notary Jacques Ferrand_
must be construed as a link in the life of Mystery. Here is the way Herr
Szeliga reasons:

"Education as yet is unable and unwilling to bring all estates and
distinctions into its circle. Only _Christianity and morality_ are able
to found universal kingdoms on earth."

Herr Szeliga identifies education, civilisation, with _aristocratic_
education. That is why he cannot see that _industry and trade_ found
universal kingdoms quite different from Christianity and morality,
domestic happiness and civic welfare. But how do we come to the _notary
Jacques Ferrand_? Quite simply!

Herr Szeliga transforms _Christianity_ into an _individual_ quality,
_"piety_”, and _morality_ into another _individual_ quality,
"_probity_". He combines these two qualities in one individual whom he
christens _Jacques Ferrand_, because Jacques Ferrand does not possess
these two qualities but only pretends to. Thus Jacques Ferrand becomes
the "mystery of probity and piety". His "testament", on the other hand,
is "the mystery of _seeming_ piety and probity", and therefore no longer
of piety and probity themselves. If Critical Criticism had wanted
speculatively to construe this testament as a mystery, it should have
declared the seeming probity and piety to be the mystery of this
testament, and not the other way round, this testament as the mystery of
the seeming probity.

Whereas the Paris college of notaries considered Jacques Ferrand as a
malicious libel against itself and through the theatrical censorship had
this character removed from the stage performance of the _Mysteres de
Paris_, Critical Criticism, at the very time when it "_polemises against
the airy kingdom of conceptions_”, sees in a Paris notary not a Paris
notary but religion and morality, probity and piety. The trial of the
notary _Lehon_ ought to have taught it better. The position held by the
_notary_ in Eugene Sue's novel is closely connected with his official
position.

"Les notaires sont au temporel ce qu'au spirituel sont les curés; ils
sont les dépositaires de nos secrets" (Monteil, Hist[oire] des frangais
des div[ers] états," etc. t. ix, p. 37).

The notary is the secular confessor. He is a puritan by profession, and
"honesty", Shakespeare says, is "no Puritan".' He is at the same time
the go-between for all possible purposes, the manager of all civil
intrigues and plots.

With the notary Ferrand, whose whole mystery consists in his hypocrisy
and his profession, we do not seem to have made a single step forward
yet. But listen:

"If for the notary hypocrisy is a matter of the most complete
consciousness, and for Madame Roland it is, _as it were_, instinct,
_then_ between them there is the great mass of those who cannot get to
the bottom of the mystery and yet involuntarily feel a desire to do so.
It is therefore not superstition that leads the high and the low to the
sombre dwelling of the charlatan Bradamanti (Abbe Polidori); no, it is
the search for _Mystery,_ to justify themselves to the world."

"The high and the low" flock to Polidori not to find out a definite
mystery which is justified to the whole world, but to look for _Mystery_
in general, Mystery as the Absolute Subject, _in order to_ justify
themselves to the world; as if to chop wood one looked, not for an axe,
but for the Instrument _in abstracto_.

All the mysteries that Polidori possesses are limited to a means for
abortion and a poison for murder.- In a speculative frenzy Herr Szeliga
makes the "_murderer_" resort to Polidori's poison "because he wants to
be not a murderer, but respected, loved and honoured". As if in an act
of murder it was a question of respect, love or honour and not of one's
_neck_! But the Critical murderer does not bother about his neck, but
only about "_Mystery_".- As not everyone commits murder or becomes
pregnant illegitimately, how is Polidori to put _everyone_ in the
desired possession of Mystery? Herr Szeliga probably confuses the
charlatan Polidori with the scholar _Polydore Virgil_ who lived in the
sixteenth century and who, although he did not discover any mysteries,
tried to make the history of those who did, the _inventors_, the "common
property of ~he world" (see _Polidori Virgilii liber de rerum
inventoribus_, Lugduni MDCCVI).

_Mystery_, Absolute Mystery, as it has finally established itself as the
"common property of the world", consists therefore in the mystery of
abortion and poisoning. _Mystery_ could not make itself "the common
property of the world" more skilfully than by turning itself into
mysteries which are mysteries to no one.

5) "Mystery, a Mockery"

"Mystery has now become common property, the mystery of the whole world
and of every individual. Either it is my art or my instinct, or I can
buy it as a purchasable commodity."

_What_ mystery has now become the common property of the world? Is it
the mystery of rightlessness in the state, or the mystery of educated
society, or the mystery of adulterating wares, or the mystery of making
eau-de-cologne, or the mystery of "Critical Criticism"? None of all
these, but _Mystery in abstracto_, the category Mystery!

Herr Szeliga intends to depict the servants and the _porter Pipelet and
his wife_ as the incarnation of Absolute Mystery. He wants speculatively
to construct the _servant_ and the porter of "_Mystery_”. How does he
manage to make the headlong descent from _pure category_ down to the
"_servant_" who "_spies at a locked door_”, from _Mystery as the
Absolute Subject_, which is enthroned above the _roof_ in the cloudy
heavens of abstraction, down to the ground floor where the porter's
lodge is situated?

First he subjects the category Mystery to a speculative process. When by
the aid of means for abortion and poisoning Mystery has become the
common property of the world, it is

"_therefore by no means any longer concealment and inaccessibility
itself_, but it conceals itself, or better still" (always better!) "I
conceal it, _I make it inaccessible_”.

With this transformation of Absolute Mystery from _essence_ into
_concept_, from the _objective_ stage, in which it is concealment
itself, into the _subjective_ stage, in which it conceals itself, or
better still, in which I conceal it, we have not made a single step
forward. On the contrary, the difficulty seems to grow, for a mystery in
man's head or breast is more inaccessible and concealed than at the
bottom of the sea. That is why Herr Szeliga comes to the aid of his
_speculative_ progress _directly_ by means of an _empirical_ progress.

"It is _behind locked doors_" - hark! hark! - "that _henceforth_” -
henceforth! - "Mystery, is hatched, brewed and perpetrated."

Herr Szeliga has "_henceforth_" changed the speculative _ego_ of Mystery
into a very empirical, very _wooden_ reality - a _door_.

"_But with that_” - i.e., with the locked door, not with the transition
from the closed essence to the concept - "there exists _also the
possibility_ of my overhearing, eavesdropping, and spying on it."

It is not _Herr Szeliga_ who discovered the "mystery" that one can
eavesdrop at locked doors. The mass-type proverb even says that walls
have ears. On the other hand it is a quite Critical speculative mystery
that only "_henceforth_”, after the descent into the hell of the
criminals' hide-outs and the ascent into the heaven of educated society,
and after Polidori's miracles, mysteries can be brewed behind locked
doors and overheard _through_ closed doors. It is just as great a
Critical mystery that locked doors are a categorical necessity for
hatching, brewing and perpetrating mysteries - how many mysteries are
hatched, brewed, and perpetrated behind bushes! - as well as for spying
them out.

After this brilliant dialectical feat of arms, Herr Szeliga naturally
goes on from _spying_ itself to the _reasons for spying_. Here he
reveais the mystery that _malicious gloating_ is the reason for it. From
malicious gloating he goes on to the _reason for malicious gloating_.

"Everyone wishes to be better than the others," he says, "because he
keeps secret the mainsprings not only of his good actions, but of his
bad ones too, which he tries to hide in impenetrable darkness."

The sentence should be the other way round: Everyone not only keeps the
mainsprings of his good actions secret, but tries to conceal his bad
ones in impenetrable darkness because he wishes to be better than the
others.

Thus it seems we have gone from _Mystery that conceals itself_ to the
_ego_ that conceals it, from the _ego_ to the _locked door_, from the
_locked door to spying_, from _spying_ to the _reason for spying_,
malicious gloating; from _malicious gloating_ to the _reason for
malicious gloating_, the _desire to be better than the others._ We shall
soon have the pleasure of seeing the _servant_ standing at the locked
door. For the general desire to be better than the others leads us
directly to this: that "everyone is inclined to find out the mysteries
of another", and this is followed easily by the witty remark:

"In this respect _servants_ have the _best opportunity_."

Had Herr Szeliga read the records from the Paris police archives,
Vidocq's memoirs, the _Livre noir_ and the like, he would know that in
this respect the _police_ has still greater opportunity than the "best
opportunity" that servants have; that it uses servants only for crude
jobs, that it does not stop at the door or where the masters are in
_neglige,_ but creeps under their sheets next to their naked body in the
shape of a femme galante or even of a legitimate wife. In Sue's novel
the police spy "_Bras rouge_" plays a leading part in the story.

What "henceforth" annoys Herr Szeliga in servants is that they are not
"_disinterested_" enough. This Critical misgiving leads him to the
_porter Pipelet and his wife_.

"The porter's position, on the other hand, gives him relative
independence so that he can pour out free, disinterested, although
vulgar and injurious, mockery on the mysteries of the house."

At first this speculative construction of the porter is put into a great
difficulty because in many Paris houses the servant and the porter are
one and the same person for some of the tenants.

The following facts will enable the reader to form an opinion of the
Critical fantasy concerning the relatively independent, disinterested
position of the porter. The porter in Paris is the representative and
spy of the landlord. He is generally paid not by the landlord but by the
tenants. Because of that precarious position he often combines the
functions of commission agent with his official duties. During the
Terror, the Empire and the Restoration, the porter was one of the main
agents of the secret police. General Foy, for instance, was watched by
his porter, who took all the letters addressed to the general to be read
by a police agent not far away (see Froment, _La police dèvoilèe_). As a
result "_portier_" and "_èpicier_" are considered insulting names and
the porter prefers to be called "_concierge_”.

Far from being depicted as "disinterested" and harmless, Eugene Sue's
Madame Pipelet immediately cheats Rudolph when giving him his change;
she recommends to him the dishonest money-lender living in the house and
describes Rigolette to him as an acquaintance who may be pleasant to
him. She teases the major because he pays her badly and haggles with her
- in her vexation she calls him a "_commandant de deux liards" - "ca
t'apprendra à ne donner que douze francs par mois pour ton mènage_." -
and because he has the "_petitesse_” as to keep a check on his firewood,
etc. She herself gives the reason for her "independent" behaviour: the
major only pays her twelve francs a month.

According to Herr Szeliga, "Anastasia Pipelet has, _to some extent_, to
declare a small war on _Mystery_".

According to Eugene Sue, Anastasia Pipelet is a typical _Paris
Portière_. He wants "to dramatise the _Portière_, whom Henri Monier
portrayed with such mastery". But Herr Szeliga feels bound to transform
one of Madame Pipelet's qualities - "_médisance_" - into a separate
being and then to make her a representative of that being.

"The husband," Herr Szeliga continues, "the porter Alfred Pipelet, helps
her, but with less luck."

To console him for this bad luck, Herr Szeliga makes him also into an
_allegory._ He represents the "_objective_" side of Mystery, "_Mystery
as Mockery_".

"The mystery which defeats him is a mockery, a joke, that is played on
him."

Indeed, in its infinite pity divine dialectic makes the "unhappy, old,
childish man" a "_strong man_" in the _metaphysical sense_, by making
him represent a very worthy, very happy and very decisive factor in the
life-process of Absolute Mystery. The victory over Pipelet is

"_Mystery's most decisive defeat._" "A cleverer, courageous man would
not let himself be duped by a _joke_."

6) Turtle-Dove (Rigolette)

"There is still one step left. Through _its own consistent development_,
Mystery, as we saw in Pipelet and Cabrion, is driven to debase itself to
mere clowning. The _one_ thing necessary now is that the individual
should no longer agree to play that silly comedy. _Turtle-dove_ takes
that step in the most nonchalant way in the world."

Anyone in two minutes can see through the mystery of this speculative
clowning and learn to practise it himself. We will give brief directions
in this respect.

_Problem._ You must give me the speculative construction showing how man
becomes master over animals.

_Speculative solution._ Given are half a dozen animals, such as the
lion, the shark, the snake, the bull, the horse and the pug. From these
six animals abstract the category: _the_ "Animal". Imagine _the_
"Animal" to be an independent being. Regard the lion, the shark, the
snake, etc., as disguises, incarnations, of _the_ "Animal". Just as you
made your imagination, the "Animal" of your abstraction, into a real
being, now make the real animals into beings of abstraction, of your
imagination. You see that the "Animal", which in the _lion_ tears man to
pieces, in the _shark_ swallows him up, in the _snake_ stings him with
venom, in the _bull_ tosses him with its horns and in the _horse_ kicks
him, only barks at him when it presents itself as a _pug_, and converts
the fight against man into the mere _semblance of a fight_. Through its
_own consistent development_, the "Animal" is driven, as we have seen in
the _pug,_ to debase itself to a _mere clown_. When a child or a
childish man runs away from a pug, the only thing is for the individual
no longer to agree to play the silly comedy. The individual X takes this
step in the most nonchalant way in the world by using his bamboo cane on
the pug. You see how "Man", through the agency of the individual X and
the pug, has become master over the "Animal", and consequently over
animals, and in the _Animal as a pug_ has defeated the _lion as an
animal_.

Similarly Herr Szeliga's "turtle-dove" defeats the mysteries of the
present state of the world through the intermediary of Pipelet and
Cabrion. More than that! She is herself a manifestation of the category
"_Mystery_".

"She herself is not yet conscious of her high moral value, therefore she
is still a mystery to herself."

The mystery of _non_-speculative Rigolette is revealed in Eugene Sue's
book by Murph. She is "_une fort jolie grisette_". Eugene Sue described
in her the lovely human character of the Paris _grisette_. Only owing to
his devotion to the bourgeoisie and his own tendency to high-flown
exaggeration, he had to idealise the _grisette morally_. He had to gloss
over the essential point of her situation in life and her character, to
be precise, her disregard for the form of marriage, her naive attachment
to the Etudiant or the Ouvrier. It is precisely in that attachment that
she constitutes a really human contrast to the hypocritical,
narrow-hearted, self-seeking wife of the bourgeois, to the whole circle
of the bourgeoisie, that is, to the official circle.

7) The World System of the Mysteries of Paris

"This world of mysteries is now the general world system, in which the
individual action of the _Mysteries of Paris_ is set."

Before, "however", Herr Szeliga "passes on to the _philosophical
reproduction_ of the epic event", he must "assemble in a general picture
the sketches previously jotted down separately".

It must be considered as a real confession, a revelation of Herr
Szeliga's Critical Mystery, when he says that he wishes to pass ou to
the "philosophical reproduction" of the epic event. He has so far been
"philosophically reproducing" the world system.

Herr Szeliga continues his confession:

"From our presentation it appears that the individual mysteries dealt
with have not their value in themselves, each separate from the others,
and are in no way magnificent novelties for gossip, but that their value
consists in their constituting an _organically linked sequence_, the
_totality_ of which is "_Mystery_".

In his mood of sincerity, Herr Szeliga goes still further. He admits
that the "_speculative sequence_" is not the _real_ sequence of the
_Mysteres de Paris_.

"Granted, the mysteries do not appear in our epic in the relationship of
this _self-knowing sequence_" (to cost prices?). "But we are not dealing
with the _logical_, obvious, _free organism_ of criticism, but with a
_mysterious vegetable existence_."

We shall pass over Herr Szeliga's summary and go on immediately to the
point that constitutes the "transition". In Pipelet we saw the
"self-mockery of Mystery".

"In self-mockery, Mystery passes judgment on itself. _Thereby_ the
mysteries, annihilating themselves in their final consequence, challenge
every strong character to independent examination."

_Rudolph,_ Prince of Geroldstein, the _man of "pure Criticism_”, is
destined to carry out this examination and the "d_isclosure of the
mysteries_."

If we deal with Rudolph and his deeds only later, after diverting our
attention from Herr Szeliga for some time, it can already be foreseen,
and to a certain degree the reader can sense, indeed even surmise
without presumption, that instead of treating him as a "_mysterious
vegetable existence_”, which he is in the Critical _Literatur-Zeitung_,
we shall make him a "_logical_, obvious, _free_ link" in the "organism
of Critical Criticism."



ABSOLUTE CRITICAL CRITICISM, OR CRITICAL CRITICISM AS HERR BRUNO


1) Absolute Criticism’s First Campaign

a) “Spirit” and “Mass”

So far Critical Criticism has seemed to deal more or less with the
Critical treatment of various mass-type objects. We now find it dealing
with the absolutely Critical object, _with_ _itself._ So far it has
derived its relative glory from Critical debasement, rejection and
transformation of _definite_ mass-type objects and persons. It now
derives its _absolute_ glory from the Critical debasement, rejection and
transformation of the Mass in general. Relative Criticism was faced with
relative limits. Absolute Criticism is faced with an absolute limit, the
limit of the Mass, the Mass as limit. Relative Criticism in its
opposition to definite limits was itself necessarily a _limited_
individual. Absolute Criticism, in its opposition to the _general_
limit, to limit in general, is necessarily an _absolute_ individual. As
the various mass-type objects and persons have merged in the _impure_
pulp of the “_Mass_”, so has still seemingly objective and personal
Criticism changed into “_pure Criticism_”. So far Criticism has appeared
to be more or less a quality of the Critical individuals: Reichardt,
Edgar, Faucher, etc. Now it is the _Subject_ and Herr Bruno is its
incarnation.

So far _mass character_ has seemed to be more or less the quality of the
objects and persons criticised; now objects and persons have become the
“_Mass_”, and the “_Mass_” has become object and person. All previous
Critical attitudes have been dissolved in the attitude of absolute
Critical wisdom to absolute mass-type stupidity. This _basic attitude_
appears as the _meaning_, the _tendency_ and the _keyword_ of
Criticism’s previous deeds and struggles.

In accordance with its absolute character, “pure” Criticism, as soon as
it appears, will pronounce the differentiating “_cue_”; nevertheless, as
Absolute Spirit it must go through a dialectical process. Only at the
end of its heavenly motion will its original concept be truly realised
(see Hegel, _Enzyklopädie_).

“Only a few months ago,” Absolute Criticism announces, “the Mass
believed itself to be of gigantic strength and destined to world mastery
within a time that it could count on its fingers.”

It was precisely Herr _Bruno Bauer_, in _Die gute Sache der Freiheit_
[The Good Cause of Freedom] (his “_own_” cause, of course), in _Die
Judenfrage_, ^([22]) etc., who counted on his fingers the time until the
approaching world mastery, although he admitted he could not give the
exact date. To the record of the sins of the Mass he adds the mass of
his own sins.

“The Mass thought itself in possession of so many truths which seemed
obvious to it.” “But one _possesses a truth_ completely only ... when
one follows it through _its_ proofs.”

For Herr Bauer, as for Hegel, truth is an _automaton_ that proves
itself. Man must _follow_ it. As in Hegel, the result of real
development is nothing but the _truth proven_, — i.e., brought to
_consciousness._ Absolute Criticism may therefore ask with the most’
narrow-minded theologian:

“_What_ would be the purpose of _history_ if it; task were not precisely
to _prove_ these simplest of all truths (such as the movement of the
earth round the sun)?”

Just as, according to the earlier teleologists, plants exist to be eaten
by animals, and animals to be eaten by men, history exists in order to
serve as the act of consumption of theoretical eating — _proving_. Man
exists so that history may exist, and history exists so that the _proof
of truths_ exists. In this _Critically_ trivialised form is repeated the
speculative wisdom that man exists, and history exists, so that _truth_
may arrive at _self-consciousness._

That is why _history_, like _truth_, becomes a person apart, a
metaphysical subject of which the real human individuals are merely the
bearers. That is why Absolute Criticism uses phrases like these:

“_History_ does not allow itself to be mocked at ... _History_ has
exerted _its_ greatest efforts to ... _History_ has been engaged ...
what would be the purpose of History?... _History_ provides the explicit
proof ... _History_ puts forward truths,” etc.

If, as Absolute Criticism asserts, history has so far been occupied with
only a _few_ such truths — the simplest of all — which in the end are
self-evident, this inadequacy to which Absolute Criticism reduces
previous human experiences proves first of all only its own inadequacy.
From the un-Critical standpoint the result of history is, on the
contrary, that the most complicated truth, the quintessence of all
truth, man, is self-evident in the end.

“But truths,” Absolute Criticism continues to argue, “which _seem_ to
the mass to be so crystal-clear that they are self-evident _from the
start_ ... and that the mass regards proof of them as superfluous, are
not worth history supplying explicit proof of them; they are in general
no part of the problem which history is engaged in solving.”

In its holy zeal against the mass, Absolute Criticism pays it the finest
compliment. If a truth is _crystal-clear_ because it _seems_
crystal-clear to the mass; if history’s _attitude_ to truths _depends_
on the _opinion_ of the mass, then the verdict of the mass is absolute,
infallible, the _law_ of history, and history proves only what does not
seem crystal-clear to the mass, and therefore needs proof. It is the
mass, then, that prescribes history’s “task” and “occupation”.

Absolute Criticism speaks of “truths which are self-evident _from the
start._ In its Critical naivety it invents an absolute “_from the
start_” and an abstract, immutable “_mass_”. There is just as little
difference, in the eyes of Absolute Criticism, between the “from the
start” of the sixteenth-century mass and the “from the start” of the
nineteenth-century mass as there is between those masses themselves. It
is precisely the characteristic feature of a truth which has become true
and obvious and is self-evident that it is “self-evident _from the
start_”. Absolute Criticism’s polemic against truths which are
self-evident from the start is a polemic against truths which are
“self-evident” in general.

A truth which is self-evident has lost its savour, its meaning, its
value for Absolute Criticism as it has for divine _dialectic_. It has
become flat, like stale water. On the one hand, therefore, Absolute
Criticism proves everything which is self-evident and, in addition, many
things which have the luck to be incomprehensible and therefore will
never be self-evident. On the other hand, it considers as self-evident
everything which needs some elaboration. Why? Because it is
_self_-evident that _real problems_ are not self-evident.

Since, _the_ “Truth”, like history, is an ethereal subject separate from
the material mass, it addresses itself not to the empirical man but to
the “_innermost depths of the soul_”; in order to be “_truly
apprehended_” it does not act on his _vulgar body_, which may live deep
down in an English cellar or at the top of a French block of flats; it
“stretches” “from end to end” through his idealistic intestines.
Absolute Criticism does certify that “the mass” has so far in its own
way, i.e., superficially, been affected by the truths that history has
been so gracious as to “put forward”; but at the same time it prophesies
that

“the _attitude_ of the _mass_ to _historical progress_ will “_completely
change_”.

It will not be long before the mysterious meaning of this Critical
prophecy becomes “crystal-clear” to us.

“All great actions of previous history,” we are told, “were failures
_from the start_ and had no effective success because the mass became
_interested_ in and _enthusiastic_ over them — or, they were bound to
come to a pitiful end because the idea underlying them was such that it
had to be content with a superficial comprehension and therefore to rely
on the approval of the mass.”

It seems that the comprehension which suffices for, and therefore
corresponds to, an idea ceases to be superficial. It is only for
appearance’s _sake_ that Herr Bruno brings out a _relation_ between an
_idea_ and its _comprehension_, just as it is only for _appearance’s
sake_ that he brings out a _relation_ between unsuccessful historical
action and the _mass_. If, therefore, Absolute Criticism condemns
something as “superficial”, it is simply previous history, the actions
and ideas of which were those of the “masses”. It rejects _mass-type_ —
history to replace it by _Critical_ history (see Herr Jules Faucher on
English problems of the day). According to previous _un-Critical_
history, i.e., history not conceived in the sense of Absolute Criticism,
it must further be precisely distinguished to what extent the _mass_ was
“_interested_” in aims and to what extent it was “_enthusiastic_” over
them.. The “_idea_” always disgraced itself insofar as it differed from
the “_interest_”. On the other hand, it is easy to understand that every
mass-type “_interest_” that asserts itself historically goes far beyond
its real limits in the “_idea_” or “_imagination_” when it-first comes
on the scene and is confused with _human_ interest in general. This
_illusion_ constitutes what _Fourier_ calls the _tone_ of each
historical epoch. The _interest_ of the bourgeoisie in the 1789
Revolution, far from having been a “_failure_”, “_won_” everything and
had “_most_ _effective success_”, however much its “_pathos_” has
evaporated and the “_enthusiastic_” flowers with which that Interest
adorned its cradle have faded. That interest was so powerful that it was
victorious over the pen of Marat, the guillotine of the Terror and the
sword of Napoleon as well as the crucifix and the blue blood of the
Bourbons. The Revolution was a “failure” only for the mass which did not
have in the _political_ “idea” the idea of its real “_interest_”, i.e.,
whose true life-principle did not coincide with the life-principle of
the Revolution, the mass whose real conditions for emancipation were
essentially different from the conditions within which the bourgeoisie
could emancipate itself and society. If the Revolution, which can
exemplify all great historical “actions”, was a failure, it was so
because the mass within whose living conditions it essentially came to a
stop, was an _exclusive, limited_ mass, not an all-embracing one. If the
Revolution was a failure it was not because the mass was
“_enthusiastic_” over it and “_interested_” in it, but because the most
numerous part of the mass, the part distinct from the bourgeoisie, did
not have its _real_ interest in the principle of the Revolution, did not
have a revolutionary principle of its own, but _only_ an “_idea_”, and
hence only an object of momentary enthusiasm and only seeming _uplift_.

Together with the thoroughness of the historical action, the size of the
mass whose action it is will therefore increase. In Critical history,
according to which in historical actions it is not a matter of the
acting masses, of empirical action, or of the empirical interest of this
action, but instead is only “a matter of an _idea in them_”, things must
naturally take a different course.

“_In the mass_,” Criticism teaches us, “_not somewhere else,_ as its
former liberal spokesmen believed, _is the enemy of the spirit to be
found_.”

The enemies of progress _outside_ the mass are precisely those
_products_ of _self-debasement, self-rejection_ and _self-alienation_ of
the _mass_ which have been endowed with independent being and a life of
their _own_. The mass therefore turns against its _own_ deficiency when
it turns against the independently existing _products_ of its
_self-debasement_, just as man, turning against the existence of God,
turns against his _own religiosity_. But as those _practical_
self-alienations of the mass exist in the real world in an outward way,
the mass must fight them in an _outward_ way. It must by no means hold
these products of its self-alienation for mere _ideal_ fantasies, mere
_alienations of self-consciousness,_ and must not wish to abolish
material estrangement by purely _inward spiritual_ action. As early as
1789 Loustalot’s journal bore the motto:

Les grands ne nous paraissent grands
Que parce que nous sommes à genoux
— Levons nous! —

[The great appear great in our eyes
Only because we are kneeling.
Let us rise!]

But to rise it is not enough to do so in _thought_ and to leave hanging
over one’s _real sensuously perceptible_ head the _real sensuously_
_perceptible_ yoke that cannot be subtilised away with ideas. Yet
_Absolute Criticism_ has learnt from Hegel’s _Phänomenologie_ at least
_the_ art of converting _real objective_ chains that exist _outside me_
into _merely ideal_, merely _subjective_ chains, existing merely _in me_
and thus of converting all external sensuously perceptible struggles
into pure struggles of thought.

This Critical transformation is the basis of the _pre-established
harmony_ between _Critical Criticism_ and the _censorship_. From the
Critical point of view, the writer’s fight against the censor is not a
fight of “man against man”. The censor is nothing but _my own tact_
_personified_ for me by the solicitous police, my own tact struggling
against my tactlessness and un-Criticalness. The struggle of the writer
with the censor is only seemingly, only in the eyes of wicked
sensuousness, anything else than the _inner_ struggle of the writer
_with himself_. _Insofar_ as the censor is _really individually
different_ from myself, a _police executioner_ who mishandles the
product of my mind by applying an external standard alien to the matter
in question, he is a mere _mass-type_ fantasy, an _un-Critical figment
of the brain_. When Feuerbach’s _Thesen zur Reform der Philosophy_
^([23]) were prohibited by the censorship, it was not the official
barbarity of the censorship that was to blame but the uncultured
character of Feuerbach’s _Thesen_. “_Pure_” Criticism, unsullied by mass
or matter, too, has in the censor a purely “ethereal” form, divorced
from all mass-type reality.

Absolute Criticism has declared the “_Mass_” to be the _true enemy of
the Spirit_. It develops this in more detail as follows:

“The Spirit now knows where to _look_ for _its_ only _adversary_ — in
the self-deception and the pithlessness of the Mass.”

Absolute Criticism proceeds from the _dogma_ of the absolute competency
of the “_Spirit_”. Furthermore, it proceeds from the _dogma_ of the
_extramundane_ existence of the Spirit, i.e., of its existence outside
the mass of humanity. Finally, it transforms “_the_ Spirit”,
“_Progress_”, on the one hand, and “_the Mass_”, on the other, into
_fixed_ entities, into concepts, and then relates them to one another as
such given rigid extremes. It does not occur to Absolute Criticism to
investigate _the_ “_Spirit_” itself, to find out whether it is not in
its spiritualistic nature, in its airy pretensions, that the “Phrase”,
“self-deception” and “pithlessness” are rooted. No, the Spirit is
_absolute_, but unfortunately at the same time it continually turns into
_spiritlessness;_ it continually reckons without its host. Hence it must
necessarily have an _adversary_ that intrigues against it. That
adversary is the Mass.

The position is the same with “_Progress_”. In spite of the pretensions
of “_Progress_”, continual _retrogressions_ and _circular movements_
occur. Far from suspecting that the category “_Progress_” is completely
empty and abstract, Absolute Criticism is so profound as to recognise
“_Progress_” as being absolute, so as to explain retrogression by
assuming a “_personal adversary_” of Progress, _the_ _Mass. As “the
Mass_” is nothing but the “_opposite of the Spirit_”, of _Progress,_ of
“_Criticism_”, it can accordingly be defined only by this imaginary
opposition; apart from that opposition all that Criticism can say about
the meaning and the existence of the Mass is only something
_meaningless_, because completely undefined:

“The Mass, in _that sense_ in which the ‘_word’ also_ embraces the
_so-called_ educated world.”

“Also” and “so-called suffice for a Critical definition. The “Mass” is
therefore distinct from the _real_ masses and exists as _the_ “_Mass_”
only for “_Criticism_”.

All communist and socialist writers proceeded from the observation that,
on the one hand, even the most favourably brilliant deeds seemed to
remain without brilliant results, to end in trivialities, and, on the
other, _all progress of the Spirit_ had so far been _progress against
the mass of mankind_, driving it into an ever more _dehumanised_
situation. They therefore declared “_progress_” (see _Fourier_) to be an
inadequate, abstract phrase; they assumed (see _Owen_ among others) a
fundamental flaw in the civilised world; that is why they subjected the
_real_ foundations of contemporary society to incisive _criticism_. This
communist criticism had practically at once as its counterpart the
movement of the great mass, in opposition to which history had been
developing so far. One must know the studiousness, the craving for
knowledge, the moral energy and ‘the unceasing urge for development of
the French and English workers to be able to form an idea of the human
nobility of this movement.

How infinitely _profound_ then is “Absolute Criticism”, which, in face
of these intellectual and practical facts, sees in a one-sided way only
_one_ aspect of the relationship, the continual foundering of the
Spirit, and, vexed at this, seeks in addition an _adversary_ of the
“Spirit”, which it finds in _the_ “Mass"! In the end this great Critical
_discovery_ amounts to a _tautology_. According to Criticism, _the_
Spirit has so far had a limit, an obstacle, in other words, an
_adversary_, _because_ it has had an _adversary_. Who, then, is the
adversary of the _Spirit_? _Spiritlessness._ For the Mass is defined
only as the “opposite” of the Spirit, as _spiritlessness_ or, to take
the more precise definitions of spiritlessness, as “indolence”,
“superficiality”, “self-complacency”. What a fundamental superiority
over the communist writers it is not to have traced spiritlessness,
indolence, superficiality and self-complacency to their places of
origin, but to have denounced them _morally_ and _exposed_ them as the
opposite of the Spirit, of Progress! If these qualities are proclaimed
qualities of _the_ Mass, as of a _subject_ still distinct from them,
that distinction is nothing but a “Critical” _semblance_ of distinction.
Only in _appearance_ has Absolute Criticism a _definite_ concrete
subject besides the abstract qualities of spiritlessness, indolence,
etc., for “_the_ _Mass_” in the Critical conception is _nothing_ but
those abstract qualities, another _word_ for them, a _fantastic
personification_ of them. . The relation between “Spirit and Mass” has,
however, also a _hidden_ meaning which will be completely revealed in
the course of the reasoning. We only indicate it here. That relation
_discovered_ by Herr Bruno is, in fact, nothing but a _Critically
caricatured consummation of Hegel’s conception of history_, which, in
turn, is nothing but the _speculative_ expression of the
_Christian-Germanic_ dogma of the antithesis between _Spirit_ and
_Matter_, between God and the world-. This antithesis finds expression
in history, in the human world itself in such a way that a few chosen
_individuals_ as the _active Spirit_ are counterposed to the rest of
mankind, as the _spiritless Mass,_ as _Matter._

_Hegel’s_ conception of history presupposes an _Abstract_ or _Absolute_
_Spirit_ which develops in such a way that mankind is a mere _mass_ that
bears the Spirit with a varying degree of consciousness or.
unconsciousness. Within _empirical_, exoteric history, therefor e, Hegel
makes a speculative, esoteric history, develop. The history of mankind
becomes the history of the _Abstract Spirit_ of mankind, hence a _spirit
far removed_ from the real man.

Parallel with this doctrine of Hegel’s there developed in France the
theory of the _doctrinaires_ ^([24]) proclaiming the _sovereignty of
reason_ in opposition to the _sovereignty_ _of the people,_ in order to
exclude the masses and rule _alone_. This was quite consistent. If the
activity of _real_ mankind is nothing but the activity of a mass of
human individuals, then abstract _generality, Reason, the_ Spirit, on
the contrary, must have an abstract expression restricted to a few
individuals. It then depends on the situation and imaginative power of
each individual whether he will claim to be this representative of “the
Spirit”.

Already in _Hegel_ the _Absolute Spirit_ of history has its material in
the _Mass_ and finds its appropriate expression only in _philosophy_.
_The_ philosopher, however, is only the organ through which the maker of
history, the Absolute Spirit, arrives at self-consciousness
_retrospectively_ after the movement has ended. The participation of the
philosopher in history is reduced to this retrospective consciousness,
for the real movement is accomplished by the Absolute Spirit
_unconsciously_. Hence the philosopher appears on the scene _post
festum_ [after the event].

Hegel is guilty of being doubly half-hearted: firstly in that, while
declaring that philosophy is the mode of existence of the Absolute
Spirit, he refuses to recognise the _actual philosophical individual_ as
the _Absolute_ Spirit; secondly, in that he lets the Absolute Spirit as
Absolute Spirit make history only in _appearance_. For since the
Absolute Spirit becomes _conscious_ of itself as the creative World
Spirit only _post festum_ in the philosopher, its making of history
exists only in the consciousness, in the opinion and conception of the
philosopher, i.e., only in the speculative imagination. Herr Bruno Bauer
overcomes Hegel’s half-heartedness.

_Firstly_, he proclaims _Criticism_ to be the Absolute Spirit and
_himself_ to be _Criticism_. Just as the element of Criticism is
banished from the Mass, so the element of the Mass is banished from
Criticism. Therefore _Criticism_ sees itself incarnate not in a _mass,_
but exclusively in a _handful_ of chosen men, in Herr _Bauer_ and his
disciples.

Herr Bauer furthermore overcomes Hegel’s other half-heartedness. No
longer, like the Hegelian Spirit, does he make history _post festum_ and
in imagination. He _consciously_ plays the part of the _World Spirit_ in
opposition to the mass of the rest of mankind; he enters into a
contemporary _dramatic_ relation with that mass; he invents and executes
history with a purpose and after mature reflection.

On the one side is the Mass as the passive, spiritless, unhistorical,
_material_ element of history. On the other is _the_ Spirit,
_Criticism_, Herr Bruno and Co. as the active element from which all
_historical_ action proceeds. The act of transforming society is reduced
to the _cerebral activity_ of Critical Criticism.

Indeed, the relation of Criticism, and hence of Criticism incarnate,
Herr Bruno and Co., to the Mass is in truth the only historical relation
of the present time. The whole of present-day history is reduced to the
movement of these two sides against each other. All antitheses have been
dissolved in this _Critical_ antithesis.

Critical Criticism, which becomes _objective_ to itself only in relation
to its antithesis, to the Mass, to _stupidity_, is consequently obliged
continually _to produce_ this antithesis for itself, and Herren Faucher,
Edgar and Szeliga have supplied sufficient proof of their Virtuosity in
their speciality, the _mass stupefaction_ of persons and things.

Let us now accompany Absolute Criticism in its _campaigns_ against the
_Mass._

b) The Jewish Question No. 1. The Setting of the Questions

The “Spirit”, contrary to the Mass, behaves from the outset in a
_Critical way_ by considering its own narrow-minded work, Bruno Bauer’s
_Die Judenfrage_, as absolute, and only the opponents of that work as
sinners. In Reply No. 1 ^([25]) to attacks on that treatise, he does not
show any inkling of its defects; on the contrary, he declares he has set
forth the “true”, “_general_” (!) significance of the Jewish question.
In later replies we shall see him obliged to admit his “_oversights_”.

“The reception my book has had is the _beginning_ of the proof that the
very ones who so far have advocated freedom, and still advocate it, must
rise against the Spirit more than any others; the defence of my book
which 1 am now going to undertake will supply further pond how
thoughtless the _spokesmen of the Mass_ are; they have God knows what a
great opinion of themselves for supporting emancipation and the dogma of
the ‘_rights of man’._”

On the occasion of a treatise by Absolute Criticism, the “Mass” must
necessarily have _begun_ to prove its antithesis to the Spirit; for it
is its antithesis to Absolute Criticism that _determines_ and _proves_
its very _existence_.

The polemic of a few liberal and rationalist Jews against Herr Bruno’s
_Die Judenfrage_ has naturally a Critical meaning quite different from
that of the mass-type polemic of the liberals against philosophy and of
the rationalists against Strauss. Incidentally, the originality of the
above-quoted remark can be judged by the following passage from _Hegel_:

“We can here note the particular form of bad conscience manifest in the
kind of eloquence with which that shallowness” (of the liberals) “plumes
itself, and first of all in the fact that it speaks most of _Spirit_
where its speech has the _least spirit_, and uses the word _life_”,
etc., “where it is most dead and withered.” [G.W.F. Hegel, Grundlinien
der Philosophie des Rechts. Vorrede]

As for the “_rights of man_”, it has been proved to Herr Bruno (“On the
Jewish Question”, _Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher_) that it is “_he
himself’,_ not the _spokesmen of the Mass,_ who has misunderstood and
dogmatically mishandled the essence of those rights. Compared to his
discovery that the rights of man are not “_inborn_” — a discovery which
has been made innumerable times in England during the last 40-odd years
— Fourier’s assertion that the right to fish, to hunt, etc., are inborn
rights of men is one of genius.

We give only a few examples of Herr Bruno’s fight against _Philippson_,
_Hirsch_ and others. Even such poor opponents as these are not disposed
of by Absolute Criticism. It is by no means preposterous of Herr
_Philippson_, as Absolute Criticism maintains, to say:

“Bauer conceives a peculiar kind of state ... a _philosophical ideal_ of
a _state._”

Herr Bruno, who confuses the state with humanity, the rights of man with
man and political emancipation with human emancipation, was bound, if
not to conceive, at least to imagine a peculiar kind of state, a
philosophical ideal of a state.

“Instead of writing his laboured statement, the rhetorician” (Herr
Hirsch) “would have done better to refute my proof that the _Christian
state_, having as its vital principle a definite religion, cannot allow
adherents of another particular religion ... complete equality with its
own social estates.”

Had the rhetorician _Hirsch_ really refuted Herr Bruno’s proof and
shown, as is done in the _Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher_, that the
state of social estates and of exclusive Christianity is not only an
incomplete state but an incomplete _Christian_ state, Herr Bruno would
have answered as he does to that refutation:

“Objections in this matter are meaningless.” ^([26])

Herr Hirsch is quite correct when in answer to Herr Bruno’s statement:

“By pressure against the mainsprings of history the Jews provided
counterpressure”,

he recalls:

“Then they must have counted for something in the making of history, and
if Bauer himself asserts this, he has no right to assert, on the other
hand, that they did not contribute anything to the making of modern
times.”

Herr Bruno answers:

“An eyesore is something too — does that mean it contributes to develop
my eyesight?”

Something which has been an eyesore to me from birth, as the Jews have
been to the Christian world, and which persists and develops with the
eye is not an ordinary sore, but a wonderful one, one that really
belongs to my eye and must even contribute to a highly original
development of my eyesight. The Critical “_eyesore_” does not therefore
hurt the rhetorician “_Hirsch_”. Incidentally, the criticism quoted
above revealed to Herr Bruno the significance of Jewry in “the _making_
of modern times”.

The theological mind of Absolute Criticism feels so offended by a
_deputy of the Rhenish Landtag_ stating that “the Jews are _queer_ in
their own Jewish way, not in our so-called Christian way”, that it is
still “calling him _to order_ for using that argument”.

Concerning the assertion of another deputy that “civil equality of the
Jews can be implemented only where Jewry no longer exists”, Herr Bruno
comments:

“Correct! That is correct if Criticism’s other proposition, which 1 put
forward in my treatise, is not omitted”, namely the proposition that
Christianity also must have ceased to exist.

We see that in its Reply No. 1 to the attacks upon _Die Judenfrage_,
Absolute Criticism still regards the abolition of religion . atheism, as
the condition for civil equality. In its first stage it has therefore
not yet acquired any deeper insight into the essence of the state than
into the “_oversights_” of its “_work_”.

Absolute Criticism feels offended when one of its _intended_ “latest”
scientific discoveries is betrayed as something already generally
recognised. A Rhenish deputy remarks:

“No one has yet maintained that France and Belgium were distinguished by
particular clarity in recognising principles in the organisation of
their political affairs.”

Absolute Criticism could have objected that that assertion transferred
the present into the past by representing as traditional the now trivial
view of the inadequacy of French political principles. Such a relevant
objection ‘ would not be profitable for Absolute Criticism. On the
contrary, it must assert the obsolete view to be that at present
prevailing, and proclaim the now prevailing view a Critical mystery
which its investigation still has to reveal to the Mass. Hence it must
say:

“It” (the antiquated prejudice) “has been asserted _by very many_” (of
the Mass): “_but a_ _thorough investigation_ of history _will_ provide
the proof that even after the great work done by France to comprehend
the principles, _much_ _still remains to be achieved._”

That means that a thorough investigation of history will not itself
“_achieve_” the comprehension of the principles. It will only _prove_ in
its thoroughness that “_much still remains to be achieved_”. _A_ great
achievement, especially after the works of the Socialists! Nevertheless
Herr Bruno _already_ achieves _much_ for the comprehension of the
present social state of things by his remark:

“The _certainty_ prevailing at present is _uncertainty_.”

If Hegel says that the prevailing Chinese certainty is “Being”, that the
prevailing _Indian_ certainty is “Nothing”, etc., Absolute Criticism
joins him in the “pure” way when it resolves the character of the
present time in the logical category “_Uncertainty_”, and all the purer
since “Uncertainty”, like “Being” and “Nothing”, belongs to the first
chapter of speculative logic, the chapter on “_Quality_”.

We cannot leave No. 1 of _Die Judenfrage_ without a general remark.

One of the chief pursuits of Absolute Criticism consists in first
bringing all questions of the day into their _right setting_. For it
does not answer the _real_ questions — it substitutes _quite different_
ones. As it makes everything, it must also first make the “questions of
the day”, make them _its own_ questions, questions of Critical
Criticism. If it were a question of the Code Napoléon, it would prove
that it is _properly_ a question of the _Pentateuch_. ^([27]) Its
_setting_ of “questions of the day” is Critical _distortion_ and
_misrepresentation_ of them. It thus distorted the “Jewish question”,
too, in such a way that it did not need to investigate _political
emancipation_, which is the subject-matter of that question, but could
instead confine itself to a criticism of the Jewish religion and a
description of the Christian-Germanic state.

This method, too, like all Absolute Criticism’s originalities, is the
repetition of a _speculative_ verbal trick. _Speculative_ philosophy,
namely, _Hegel’s_ philosophy, had to transpose all questions from the
form of common sense to the form of speculative reason and convert the
real question into a _speculative_ one to be able to answer it. Having
distorted _my_ question on my lips and, like the catechism, put _its
own_ question into my mouth, it could, of course, like the catechism,
have its ready answer to all my questions.

c) Hinrichs No. 1. Mysterious Hints on Politics, Socialism and Philosophy

“_Political!_” Absolute Criticism is literally horrified at the presence
of this word in Professor _Hinrichs’_ lectures. ^([28])

“Whoever has followed the development of modern times and knows history
will also know that the political movements at present taking place have
a significance _quite different_” (!) “from a _political_ one: at their
base” (at their base! ... now for basic wisdom) “they have a _social_”
(!) “significance, which, as we know” (!) “is such” (!) “that _all_
political interests appear _insignificant_” (!) “in comparison with it.”

A few months before the Critical _Literatur-Zeitung_ began to be
published, there appeared, _as we know_ (!), Herr Bruno’s fantastic
political treatise: _Staat, Religion und Parthei_!

If _political_ movements _have social significance_, how can political
interests appear “_insignificant_” in comparison with their own social
significance?

“Herr Hinrichs does not know his way about either in his own house or
anywhere else in the world.... He could not be at home anywhere
_because_ ... _because_ Criticism, which in the last four years has
begun and carried on its _by no means_ ‘_political_’ but ‘_social'_” (!)
“work, has remained _completely_” (!) “unknown to him.”

_Criticism_, which according to the opinion of the Mass carried on “by
no means _political_” but “in _all_ respects _theological_” work, is
still content with the _word “social_”, even now when it has uttered
this _word_ for the first time, not just in the last four years, but
since its literary birth.

Since socialist writings spread in Germany the recognition that all
human aspirations and actions without exception have _social_
significance, Herr Bruno can call his theological works social too. But
what a _Critical_ demand it is that Professor Hinrichs should have
derived socialism from an _acquaintance_ with _Bauer’s_ works,
considering that all Bruno Bauer’s works published up to the appearance
of Hinrichs’ lectures, when they do draw practical conclusions, draw
_political_ ones! It was impossible, un-Critically speaking, for
Professor Hinrichs to supplement Herr Bruno’s published works with his
as yet unpublished ones. From the Critical point of view, the Mass is,
of course, obliged to interpret all Absolute Criticism’s mass-type
“movements”, as well as “political” ones, from the angle of the future
and of Absolute Progress! But in order that Herr Hinrichs, after
becoming acquainted with the _Literatur-Zeitung_, may never again forget
the word “_social_” or fail to recognise the “_social_” character of
_Criticism_, _Criticism_ prohibits the word “political” for the third
time before the whole world and solemnly repeats the word “_social_” for
the third time.

“If the _true_ tendency of modern history is considered it is _no longer
a question of political, but_ — but of _social_ significance”, etc.

Just as Professor Hinrichs is the scapegoat for the former political”
movements, so is he also for the “_Hegelian_” movements and expressions
which Absolute Criticism used intentionally up to the publication of the
_Literatur-Zeitung_, and continues to use unintentionally in it.

Once “_real Hegelian_” and twice “_Hegelian philosopher_” are thrown in
Hinrichs’ face as catchwords. Herr Bruno even “_hopes_” that the “banal
expressions so tiresomely circulated in all the books of the _Hegelian_
school” (in particular in his own books) will, _in_ _view of_ their
great “_exhaustion_” as seen in Professor Hinrichs’ lectures, soon reach
the end of their journey. From the “_exhaustion_” _of Professor
Hinrichs_, Herr Bruno hopes for the dissolution of _Hegel’s philosophy_
and thereby _his own redemption_ from it.

Thus in its _first campaign_ Absolute Criticism overthrows its own
long-worshipped gods, “_Politics_” and “_Philosophy’,_ declaring them
idols of Professor Hinrichs.

Glorious first campaign!



2) ABSOLUTE CRITICISM’S SECOND CAMPAIGN


a) Hinrichs No. 2. “Criticism” and “Feuerbach”. Condemnation of Philosophy

As the result of its first campaign, _Absolute Criticism_ can regard
“_philosophy_” as having been dealt with and term it outright an ally of
the “_Mass_”.

“_Philosophy_ were predestined to fulfil the heart’s desires of the
‘_Mass'_”. For “the Mass _wants_ simple concepts, in order to have
nothing to do with the thing itself, shibboleths, so as to have finished
with everything from the start, phrases by which Criticism can be done
away with “ ^([29])

And “philosophy” fulfils this longing of the “Mass"!

Dizzy after its victories, Absolute Criticism breaks out in _Pythian_
frenzy against philosophy. _Feuerbach’s_ _Philosophie der Zukunft_ [L.
Feuerbach, Grundsätze der Philosophie der Zukunft] is the concealed
cauldron [Engels here makes a pun on “Feuerbach” (literally stream of
fire) and ‘Feuerkesser’ (boiler)] whose fumes inspire the frenzy of
Absolute Criticism’s victory-intoxicated head. It read Feuerbach’s work
in March. The fruit of that reading, and at the same time the criterion
of the earnestness with which it was undertaken, is Article No. 2
against Professor Hinrichs.

In this article Absolute Criticism, which has never freed itself from
the cage of the Hegelian way of viewing things, storms at the iron bars
and walls of its prison. The “simple concept”, the terminology, the
whole mode of thought of philosophy, indeed, the whole of philosophy, is
rejected with disgust. In its place we suddenly find the “_real wealth
of human relations_”, the “_immense content of history_”, the
“_significance of man_”, etc. “_The mystery of the_ _system_” is
declared “_revealed_”.

But who, then, revealed the mystery of the “system"? _Feuerbach_. Who
annihilated the dialectics of concepts, the war of the gods that was
known to the philosophers alone? _Feuerbach_. Who substituted for the
old lumber and for “infinite self-consciousness” if not, indeed, “_the
significance of man_” — as though man had another significance than that
of being man! — at any rate “_Man_"? _Feuerbach_, and only _Feuerbach_.
And he did more. Long ago he did away with the very categories with
which “_Criticism_” now operates — the “real wealth of human relations,
the immense content of history, the struggle of history, the fight of
the Mass against the Spirit”, etc., etc.

Once man is recognised as the essence, the basis of all human activity
and situations, only “_Criticism_” can invent _new_ _categories_ and
transform _man_ himself into a category and into the principle of a
whole series of categories, as it is doing now. It is true that in so
doing it takes the only road to salvation that has remained for
frightened and persecuted _theological_ inhumanity. _History_ does
_nothing_, it “possesses _no_ immense wealth”, it “wages _no_ battles”.
It is _man_, real, living man who does all that, who possesses and
fights; “history” is not, as it were, a person apart, using man as a
means to achieve _its own_ aims; history is _nothing but_ the activity
of man pursuing his aims. If _Absolute_ Criticism, after _Feuerbach’s_
brilliant expositions, still dares to reproduce all the old trash in a
new form, at the same time abusing it as “_mass-type_” trash — which it
has all the less right to do as it never stirred a finger to dissolve
philosophy — that fact alone is sufficient to bring the “_mystery_” of
Criticism to light and to assess the Critical naivety with which it says
the following to Professor Hinrichs, whose “_exhaustion_” once did it
such a great service:

“The _damage_ is to those who have not gone through any development and
therefore _could not alter themselves even if they wished to,_ and at
most to the _new_ principle — but no! The new _cannot_ be made _into a
phrase, separate turn of speech cannot be borrowed from it_.”

Absolute Criticism prides itself that, in contrast to Professor
Hinrichs, it has solved “_the mystery of the faculty sciences_”. Has it
then solved the “mystery” of philosophy, jurisprudence, politics,
medicine, political economy and so forth? Not at all! It has — be it
noted! — shown in _Die gute Sache der Freiheit_ that science as a source
of livelihood and free science, freedom of teaching and faculty
statutes, contradict each other.

If “Absolute Criticism” were honest it would have admitted where its
pretended illumination on the “Mystery of Philosophy” Comes from. It is
a good thing all the same that it does not put into _Feuerbach’s_ mouth
such nonsense as the misunderstood and distorted propositions that it
borrowed from him, as it has done with other people. By the way, it is
characteristic of “Absolute Criticism’s” _theological_ viewpoint that,
whereas the German philistines are now beginning to understand
_Feuerbach_ and to adopt his conclusions, it is unable to grasp a single
sentence of his correctly or to use it properly.

Criticism achieves a real advance over its feats of the first campaign
when it “defines” the struggle of “_the Mass_” against the “Spirit” as
“_the aim_” of all previous history, when it declares that “_the Mass_”
is the “_pure nothing_” of “misery”; when it calls the Mass purely and
simply “_Matter_” and contrasts “_the Spirit_” as truth to “Matter”. Is
not Absolute Criticism therefore _genuinely Christian-Germanic_? After
the old antithesis between spiritualism and materialism has been fought
out on all sides and overcome once for all by _Feuerbach_, “_Criticism_”
again makes a basic dogma of it in its most loathsome form and gives the
victory to the “_Christian-Germanic spirit_”.

Finally, it must be considered as a development of Criticism’s mystery
concealed in its first campaign when it now identifies the antithesis
between _Spirit_ and _Mass_ with the antithesis between “_Criticism_”
and the Mass. Later it will go on to identify _itself_ with
“_Criticism_” and therefore to represent itself as “_the Spirit_”, the
Absolute and Infinite, and the Mass, on the other hand, as finite,
coarse, brutal, dead and inorganic — for that is what “_Criticism_”
understands by matter.

How immense is the wealth of history that is exhausted in the
relationship of humanity to _Herr Bauer_!

b) The Jewish Question No. 2 Critical Discoveries on Socialism, Jurisprudence and Politics (Nationality)

To the material, mass-type Jews is preached the _Christian_ doctrine of
_freedom of the Spirit, freedom in theory_, that _spiritualistic_
freedom which _imagines_ itself to be free even in chains, and whose
soul is satisfied with “_the idea_” and only embarrassed by any
mass-type existence.

“The Jews are _emancipated_ to the extent they have now reached in
_theory_, they are _free_ to the extent that they _wish to be free._”
^([30])

From this proposition one can immediately measure the Critical gap which
separates _mass-type_, profane communism and socialism from _absolute_
socialism. The first proposition of profane socialism rejects
emancipation _in_ _mere theory_ as an illusion and for _real_ freedom it
demands besides the idealistic “_will_” very tangible, very material
conditions. How low “_the_ Mass” is in comparison with holy Criticism,
the Mass which considers material, practical Upheavals necessary even to
win the time and means required merely to occupy itself with “_theory_"!

Let us leave purely spiritual socialism an instant for _politics_!

Herr _Riesser_ maintains against Bruno Bauer that his state (i.e., the
_Critical_ state) must exclude “Jews” and “Christians”. Herr Riesser is
right. Since Herr Bauer confuses _political_ emancipation with _human_
emancipation, since the state can react to antagonistic elements — and
Christianity and Judaism are described as treasonable elements in _Die
Judenfrage_ — only by forcible exclusion of the persons representing
them (as the Terror, for instance, wished to do away with hoarding by
guillotining the hoarders ^([31])), Herr Bauer must have both Jews and
Christians hanged in his “Critical state”. Having confused political
emancipation with human emancipation, he had to be consistent and
confuse the _political means_ of emancipation with the _human means_.
But as soon as Absolute Criticism is told the _definite_ meaning of its
deductions, it gives the answer that _Schelling_ once gave to all his
opponents who substituted _real_ thoughts for his phrases:

“_Criticism’s_ opponents are its opponents because they not only measure
it with their _dogmatic_ yardstick but regard Criticism itself as
_dogmatic_; they oppose Criticism because it does not recognise their
dogmatic distinctions, definitions and evasions.”

It is, of course, to adopt a dogmatic attitude to Absolute Criticism, as
also to Herr _Schelling_, if one assumes it to have _definite_, real
meaning, thoughts and views. In order to be accommodating and to prove
to Herr Riesser its humanity, “_Criticism_”, however, decides to resort
to dogmatic distinctions, definitions and especially to “_evasions_”.

Thus we read:

“Had I in that work” (_Die Judenfrage_) “had the _will_ or the _right_
to go _beyond,_ criticism, I _ought’_ (!) .’to _have spoken_” (!) “not
of the _state_, but of ‘_society_’, which excludes no one but from which
only those exclude themselves who do not wish to take part in its
development.”

Here Absolute Criticism makes a _dogmatic distinction_ between what it
ought to have done, if it had not done the contrary, and what it
actually did. It explains the narrowness of its work _Die Judenfrage_ by
the “_dogmatic evasions_” of having the _will_ and the _right_ which
prohibited it from going “_beyond criticism_”. What? “_Criticism_”
should go _beyond_ “_criticism_"? This quite _mass-type_ notion occurs
to Absolute Criticism because of the dogmatic necessity for, on the one
hand, asserting its conception of the Jewish question as absolute, as
“_Criticism_”, and on the other hand, admitting the possibility of a
more comprehensive conception.

The _mystery_ of its “_not having the will_” and “_not having the
right_” will later be revealed as the Critical _dogma_ according to
which all apparent limitations of “Criticism” are nothing but necessary
_adaptations_ to the powers of comprehension of the Mass.

It had not the _will_! It _had_ not the _right_ to go beyond its narrow
conception of the Jewish question! But what would it have done _had_ it
_had_ the _will_ or the _right_? — It would have given a _dogmatic
definition_. It would have spoken of “_society_” instead of the “state”,
that is to say, it would not have studied the _real_ relation of Jewry
to _present-day civil_ society! It would have given a _dogmatic
definition_ of “_society_” as distinct from the “state”, in the sense
that if the _state_ excludes, on the other hand _they exclude_
themselves from society who do not wish to take part in its development!

Society behaves just as exclusively as the state, only in a more polite
form: it does not throw you out, but it makes it so uncomfortable for
you that you go out of your own will.

Basically, the state does not behave otherwise, for it does not exclude
anybody who complies with all _its_ demands and orders and its
development. In its _perfection_ it even closes its eyes and declares
_real_ contradictions to be _non-political_ contradictions which do not
disturb it. Besides, Absolute Criticism itself has argued that the state
excludes Jew.. because and in so far as the Jews exclude the state and
hence exclude _themselves_ from the state. If this reciprocal
relationship has a more polite, a more hypocritical, a more insidious
form in _Critical_ “society”, this only proves that “_Critical_”
“_society_” is more hypocritical and less developed.

Let us follow Absolute Criticism deeper in its “dogmatic distinctions”
and “definitions”, and, in particular, in its “_evasions_”.

Herr Riesser, for example, demands of the critic “that he _distinguish_
what belongs to the domain of law” from “what is beyond its sphere”.

_The_ Critic is indignant at the impertinence of this _juridical_
demand.

“So far, _however_,” he retorts, “both feeling and conscience have
interfered in law, always supplemented it, and because of its character,
based on its _dogmatic form_” (not, therefore, on its dogmatic
_essence_?), “have always had to supplement it.”

_The_ Critic forgets only that _law_, on the other hand, _distinguishes
itself_ quite explicitly from “feeling and conscience”, that this
distinction is based on the one-sided _essence_ of _law_ as well as on
its dogmatic _form_, and is even one of the _main dogmas_ of law; that,
finally, the practical implementation of that distinction is just as
much the peak of the _development of law_ as the separation of religion
from all profane content makes it _abstract, absolute_ religion. The
fact that “feeling and conscience” interfere in law is sufficient reason
for the “Critic” to speak of feeling and conscience when it is a matter
of _law_, and of _theological_ dogmatism when it is a matter of
_juridical_ dogmatism.

The “definitions and distinctions of Absolute Criticism” have prepared
us sufficiently to hear its latest “_discoveries_” on “_society_” and
“_law_”.

“The world form that _Criticism_ is preparing, and the _thought_ of
which it is _even only_ just preparing, is not a _merely legal_ form
but” (collect yourself, reader) “a _social_ one, about which _at_
_least_ this much” (this little?) “_can_ he said: whoever has not made
his contribution to its development and does not live with his
conscience and feeling in it. cannot feel at home in it or take part in
its history.”

The world form that “_Criticism_” is preparing is defined as _not
merely_ legal, _but_ social. This definition can be interpreted in two
ways. The sentence quoted may be taken as “_not_ legal _but_ social” or
as “not merely legal, but _also_ social”. Let us consider its content
according to both readings, beginning with the first. Earlier, Absolute
Criticism defined the new “world form” distinct from the “_state_” as
“society”. Now it defines the noun “_society_” by the adjective
“_social_”. If Herr Hinrichs was three times given the _word “social_”
in contrast to his “_political_”, Herr Riesser is now given _social
society_ in contrast to his “_legal_” society. If the _Critical_
explanations for Herr Hinrichs reduced themselves to the formula
“social” + “social” + “social” = 3a, Absolute Criticism in its second
campaign passes from _addition_ to _multiplication_ and Herr Riesser is
referred to society multiplied by itself, society to the _second_ power,
Social society = a2. In order to complete its deductions on society, all
that now remains for Absolute Criticism to do is to go On to fractions,
to extract the _square root_ of society, and so forth.

If, on the other hand, we take the second reading: the “_not merely_
legal, _but also_ social” world form, this hybrid world form is nothing
but the _world form_ existing _today_, the world form of _present-day
society._ It is a great, a meritorious _Critical miracle_ that
“_Criticism_” in its pre-world thinking is only just _preparing_ the
_future_ existence of the world form which _exists today._ But however
matters stand with “not merely legal but social society”, _Criticism_
can for the time being say no more about it than “_fabula docet_”,[the
fable teaches] the _moral_ application. Those who do not live in that
society with their feeling and their conscience will “not _feel_ at
home” in it. In the end, no one will live in that society except “pure
feeling” and “pure conscience”, that is, “the Spirit”, “_Criticism_” and
its _supporters_. The _Mass_ will be excluded from it in one way or
another so that “mass-type society” will exist outside “social society”.

In a word, this society is nothing but the _Critical heaven_ from which
the real world is excluded as being the _un-Critical hell_. In its pure
thinking, Absolute Criticism is preparing this transfigured _world form_
of the contradiction between “_Mass_” and “_Spirit_”.

Of the same _Critical_ depth as these explanations on “_society_” are
the explanations Herr Riesser is given on the destiny of _nations_.

The Jews’ desire for emancipation and the desire of the Christian states
to “classify” the Jews in “their government scheme” — as though the Jews
had not long ago been classified in the Christian government scheme! —
lead Absolute Criticism to prophecies on the _decay of nationalities_.
See by what a complicated detour Absolute Criticism arrives at the
present historical movement — namely, by the _detour_ _of theology._ The
following illuminating oracle shows us what great results Criticism
achieves in this way:

“The _future_ of all nationalities — _is_ — _very_ — _obscure_!”

But let the future of nationalities be as obscure as it may be, for
Criticism’s sake. The one essential thing is _clear_: the _future_ is
the _work of Criticism_.

“_Destiny_,” it exclaims, “may decide as it will: we now know that it is
_our_ _work_.”

As God leaves _his creation_, man, his _own will_, so _Criticism_ leaves
destiny, which is _its creation_, its _own will_. _Criticism_, of which
destiny is the work, is, like God, _almighty_. Even the “resistance”
which it “_finds_” outside itself is its own work. “_Criticism makes_
its adversaries.” The “_mass indignation_” against it is therefore
“dangerous” only for “the Mass” itself.

But if Criticism, like God, is _almighty_, it is also, like God,
_all-wise_ and is capable of combining its almightiness with the
_freedom_, the will and the _natural determination_ of human
individuals.

“It would not be the _epoch-making_ force if it did not have the effect
of _making each one_ what he _wills_ to be and showing each one
irrevocably the standpoint _corresponding to his nature_ and _his
will_.”

_Leibniz_ could not have given a happier presentation of the
re-established harmony between the almightiness of God and the p freedom
and natural determination of man.

If “_Criticism_” seems to clash with psychology by _not distinguishing_
between the _will_ to be something and the _ability_ to be something, it
must be borne in mind that it has decisive grounds to declare this
“_distinction_” “_dogmatic_”.

Let us steel ourselves for the third campaign! Let us recall once more
that “_Criticism makes_ its adversary"! But how could it make its
adversary, _the. “phrase_”, if it were not a phrase-monger?



3) ABSOLUTE CRITICISM’S THIRD CAMPAIGN


a) Absolute Criticism’s Self-Apology. Its “Political” Past

_Absolute_ Criticism begins its third campaign against the “_Mass_” with
the question:

“_What is now the object of criticism_?” ^([32])

In the same number of the _Literatur-Zeitung_ we find the information:

“_Criticism_ wishes _nothing_ but to know _things_.”

According to this, all things are the _object_ of Criticism. It would be
senseless to inquire about some particular, definite object peculiar to
Criticism. The contradiction is easily resolved when one remembers that
all things “merge” into Critical things and all Critical things into
_the Mass,_ as _the “Object_” of “_Absolute Criticism_”.

First of all, Herr Bruno describes his _infinite pity_ for the “_Mass._”
He makes “_the gap_ that separates him from the _crowd_” an object of
“_persevering study_.” He wants “_to find out the significance of that
gap for the future_” (this is what above was called knowing “_all_”
things) and at the same time “_to abolish it_”. In truth he therefore
already knows the _significance_ of that gap. It consists in being
_abolished_ by him.

As each man’s self is nearest to him, “_Criticism_” first sets about
abolishing its _own mass nature_, like the Christian ascetics who begin
the campaign of the spirit against the flesh with the mortification of
their own flesh. The “_flesh_” of Absolute Criticism is its _really_
massive literary _past_, amounting to 20-30 volumes. Herr Bauer must
therefore free the literary biography of “_Criticism_” — which coincides
exactly with his own literary biography — from its _mass-like
appearance_; he must retrospectively _improve_ and _explain_ it and by
this _apologetic_ commentary “_place its earlier works in safety_”.

He begins by explaining by a double cause the error of the _Mass_, which
until the end of the _Deutsche Jahrbücher_ and the _Rheinische Zeitung_
^([33]) regarded Herr Bauer as one of its supporters. Firstly the
mistake was made of regarding the literary movement as _not_ “_purely
literary_”. At the same time the opposite mistake was made, that of
regarding the literary movement as “a merely” or purely” _literary_
movement. There is no doubt that the “Mass” was mistaken in any case, if
only because it made two mutually incompatible errors at _the same
time_.

Absolute Criticism takes this opportunity of exclaiming to those who
ridiculed the “German nation” as a “_blue stocking_":

“Name even a single historical epoch which was not authoritatively
_outlined beforehand by the ‘pen’_ and had not to allow itself to be
shattered by a stroke of the pen.”

In his Critical naivety Herr Bruno separates “_the pen_” from the
_subject who writes,_ and the subject who writes as “abstract _writer_”
from the living _historical man_ who wrote. This allows him to go into
ecstasy over the _wonder-working_ power of the “_pen_”. He might just as
well have demanded to be told of a historical movement which was not
outlined beforehand by “poultry” or the “goose girl”.

Later we shall be told by the same Herr Bruno that so far not one
historical epoch, not a single one, has become known. How could the
“_pen_”, which so far has been unable to _outline_ “_any single_”
historical epoch _after_ the event, have been able to _outline them all
beforehand_?

Nevertheless, Herr Bruno proves the correctness of his view by _deeds,_
by himself “_outlining beforehand_” his own “past” with _apologetic
“strokes of the pen”._

_Criticism_, which was involved on all sides not only in the _general_
limitation of the world and of the epoch, but in quite particular and
personal limitations, and which nevertheless assures us that it has been
“_absolute, perfect and pure_” Criticism in all its works for as long as
man can think, has only _accommodated_ itself to the _prejudices_ and
_power of comprehension_ of the Mass, as God is wont to do in his
revelations to man.

“It was bound to come,” Absolute Criticism informs us, “to a breach of
_Theory_ with its _seeming_ _ally_.”

But because _Criticism_, here called _Theory_ for a change, comes to
_nothing_, but everything, on the contrary, comes from it; because it
develops not inside but _outside_ the world, and has predestined
everything in its divine immutable consciousness, the _breach_ with its
former ally was a “_new_ turn” only in _appearance_, only for others,
not in itself and not for _Criticism_ itself.

“But this rum ‘_properly speaking’_ was not even new. _Theory_ had
continually worked on _criticism of itself_’ (we know how much effort
has been expended on it to force it to criticise itself); “it had never
flattered the Mass” (but itself an the more); lit had always _taken
care_ not to get itself ensnared in the premises of its opponent.”

“The Christian theologian must tread _cautiously_.” (Bruno Bauer, _Das
entdeckte Christenthum_, p. 99.) How did it happen that “cautious”
Criticism nevertheless did get ensnared and did not already at that time
express its “proper” meaning clearly and audibly? Why did it not speak
out bluntly? Why did it let the illusion of its brotherhood with the
Mass persist?

“'Why hast thou done this to me?’ said Pharaoh to Abraham as he restored
to him Sarah his wife. ‘Why didst thou say she was thy sister?'” (_Das
entdeckte Christenthum_ by Bruno Bauer, p. 100.)

“'Away with reason and language!’ says the theologian, ‘for otherwise
Abraham would be a liar. It would be a mortal insult to Revelation!'”
(_loc. cit._)

“'Away with reason and language!’ says the Critic. For had Herr Bauer
_really_ and not just apparently been ensnared with the Mass, Absolute
Criticism would not be absolute in its revelations, it would be mortally
insulted.

“It is _only_,” Absolute Criticism continues, “that its” (Absolute
Criticism’s) efforts _had not been noticed_, and _there was moreover_ a
stage of Criticism when it was _forced sincerely_ to consider its
opponent’s premises and to take them seriously for an instant; a stage,
in short, when it was _not yet fully_ capable of taking away from the
Mass the latter’s conviction that it had the same cause and the same
interest as Criticism.”

“_Criticism’s_ efforts had just not been noticed; therefore the Mass was
to blame. On the other hand, Criticism admits that its efforts _could_
not be noticed because it itself was not yet “_capable_” _of making_
them _noticeable_. Criticism _therefore appears_ to be to blame.

God help us! Criticism was “forced” — violence was used against it —
“sincerely to consider its opponent’s premises and to take them
seriously for an instant”. A fine sincerity, a truly theological
sincerity, which does not really take a thing seriously but only “_takes
it_ seriously _for an instant_”; which has always, therefore every
instant, been careful not to get itself ensnared in its opponent’s
premises, and nevertheless, “for _an instant_” “sincerely” takes these
very premises into consideration. Its “sincerity” is still greater in
the closing part of the sentence. It was in the same instant when
Criticism “sincerely took into consideration the premises of the Mass”
that it “was not yet fully _capable_” of destroying the illusion about
the unity of _its_ cause and the cause of the _Mass._ It was _not yet
capable_, but it already had the _will_ and the _thought_ of it. It
_could_ not yet _outwardly_ break with the Mass but the break was
already _complete inside it_, in its _mind_ — complete in the same
instant when it _sincerely_ sympathised with the Mass!

In its involvement with the prejudices of the Mass, Criticism was not
_really_ involved in _them_; on the contrary, it was, _properly
speaking_, free from its own limitation and was only “_not yet
completely_ capable” of informing the Mass of this. Hence all the
limitation of “Criticism” was pure _appearance_; an appearance which
without the limitation of the Mass would have been superfluous and would
therefore not have existed at all. It is therefore again the Mass that
is to blame.

_Insofar_ as this _appearance_, however, was supported by “the
inability”, “the impotence” of Criticism to express its thought,
Criticism itself was _imperfect_. This it admits in its own way, which
is as sincere as it is apologetic.

“In spite of having subjected liberalism itself to devastating
criticism, it” (Criticism) “could _still_ be regarded as a peculiar kind
of liberalism, _perhaps_ as its extreme form; _in_ _spite of_ its true
and decisive arguments having gone beyond politics, it _nevertheless_
was _still_ bound to give an _appearance_ of _engaging in politics_, and
this _incomplete appearance_ won it most of the friends mentioned
above.”

Criticism won its friends through its _incomplete appearance_ of
engaging in politics. Had it _completely appeared_ to engage in
politics, it would inevitably have lost its _political_ friends. In its
_apologetic anxiety_ to wash itself free of all sin, it accuses the
_false appearance_ of having been an _incomplete false appearance_, not
a _complete false one_. By substituting one appearance for the other,
“Criticism” can console itself with the thought that if it had the
“complete appearance” of wishing to engage in politics, it does not
have, on the other hand, even the “incomplete appearance” of anywhere or
at any time having dissolved politics.

Not completely satisfied with the “incomplete appearance”, Absolute
Criticism again asks itself:

“How did it happen that _Criticism_ at that time became involved in
‘mass-linked, political’ interests, that it — _even_” (!) _— “was
obliged_” (!) — “_to engage_ in _politics_”

Bauer the _theologian_ takes it _as a matter of course_ that _Criticism_
had to indulge endlessly in _speculative theology_ for _he_,
“Criticism”, is indeed a theologian _ex professo._ But to _engage in
politics_? That must be motivated by very special, political, personal
circumstances!

Why, then, had “_Criticism_” to _engage_ even in _politics? “_It was
accused — _that is the answer to the question_.” At least the “mystery”
of “_Bauer’s politics_” is thereby disclosed; at least the _appearance_,
which in Bruno Bauer’s _Die gute Sache der Freiheit und meine eigene
Sache_ links its “_own_ cause” to the _mass-linked_ “cause of freedom”
by means of an “_and_”, cannot be called _non-political_. But if
Criticism pursued not its “own _cause_” in the _interest of politics,_
but _politics_ in the _interest of its own cause_, it must be admitted
that not Criticism was taken in by politics, but politics by Criticism.

So Bruno Bauer was to be dismissed from his chair of theology ^([34]):
he was _accused_; “_Criticism_” had to engage in politics, that is to
say, to _conduct_ “_its_”, i.e., Bruno Bauer’s, suit. Herr Bauer did not
conduct Criticism’s suit, “_Criticism_” conducted Herr Bauer’s suit. Why
did “Criticism” _have_ to conduct its suit?

“In order to justify itself!” _It may well be;_ only “_Criticism_” is
far from limiting itself to such a personal, vulgar reason. It may well
be; but _not solely_ for that reason, “_but mainly_ in order to bring
out the contradictions of its opponents”, and, Criticism could add, in
order to have bound together in a single _book_ old essays against
various theologians — see among other things the wordy bickering with
_Planck_, ^([35]) that family affair between “Bauer-theology” and
Strauss-theology.

Having got a load off its heart by admitting the real interest of its
“_politics_”, Absolute Criticism remembers its “_suit_” and again chews
the old _Hegelian_ cud (see the struggle between Enlightenment and faith
^([36]) in the _Phänomenologie_, see _the whole of_ the
_Phänomenologie_) that “the old which resists the new is no longer
really the old”, the cud which it has already chewed over at length in
_Die gute Sache der Freiheit_. Critical Criticism is a ruminant animal.
It keeps on warming up a few crumbs dropped by Hegel, like the
above-quoted proposition about the “old” and the “new”, or again that
about the “development of the extreme out of its opposite extreme”, and
the like, without ever feeling the need to deal with “_speculative
dialectic_” in any other way than by the exhaustion of Professor
Hinrichs. Hegel, on the contrary, it continually transcends “Critically”
by repeating him. For example:

“Criticism, by appearing and giving the investigation a new form, i.e.,
giving it she form which is _no longer_ susceptible of being transformed
into an external limitation,” etc.

When I _transform_ something I make it something essentially different.
Since every form is also an “_external limitation_”, _no_ form is “
susceptible” of being _transformed_ into an “external limitation” any
more than an apple of being “transformed” into an apple. Admittedly, the
form which “Criticism” gives to the investigation is not susceptible of
being transformed into any “external limitation” for quite _another_
reason. Beyond every “external limitation” it is blurred into an
ash-grey, dark-blue vapour of nonsense.

“It” (the struggle between the old and the new) “would, _however, be
quit. impossible even then_” (namely at the moment when Criticism
“gives” the investigation “the new form”) “if the old were to deal with
the question of compatibility or incompatibility ... _theoretically_.”

But why does not the old deal with this question theoretically? Because
“this, _however_, is _least of all_ possible for it in the beginning,
_since_ at _the moment of surprise_” (i.e., in the beginning) it “knows
neither itself nor the new”, i.e., it deals _theoretically_ neither with
itself nor with the new. It would be quite impossible if
“impossibility”, unfortunately, were not impossible!

When _the_ “Critic” from the theological faculty further “admits that he
erred _intentionally_, that he committed the mistake deliberately and
after mature reflection” (all that Criticism has experienced, learnt,
and done _is transformed_ for it into a free, pure and intentional
product of its reflection) this confession of the Critic has only an
“incomplete appearance” of truth. Since the _Kritik der Synoptiker_ [B.
Bauer, Kritik der evangelischen Geschichte der Synoptiker] has a
completely _theological_ foundation, since it is through and through
_theological_ criticism, Herr Bauer, university lecturer in theology,
could write and teach it “without mistake or error”. The mistake and
error were rather on the part of the theological faculties, which did
not realise how strictly Herr Bauer had kept his promise, the promise he
gave in _Kritik der Synoptiker_, Bd. 1, Foreword, p. xxiii.

“If the _negation_ may appear still too sharp and far-reaching in this
first volume too, we must remember that the truly positive can be born
only if the negation has been serious and general.... _In the end_ it
will be seen that only the most devastating criticism of the world can
teach us the creative _power of Jesus_ and of his _principle_.”

Herr Bauer intentionally separates the Lord “Jesus” and his “principle”
in order to free the _positive_ meaning of his promise from all
semblance of ambiguity. And Herr Bauer has really made the “_creative_”
power of the Lord Jesus and of his principle so evident that his
“_infinite_ _self-consciousness_” and the “_Spirit_” are nothing but
_creations_ of Christianity.

If Critical Criticism’s dispute with the Bonn theological faculty
explained so well its “politics” at that time, why did Critical
Criticism continue to engage in politics after the dispute had been
settled? Listen to this:

“At this point ‘Criticism’ _should have_ either _come to a halt_ or
immediately _proceeded_ _further_ to examine the essence of politics and
depict it as its adversary; — if only it had been possible for it to be
able to come to a halt in the struggle at that time and if, on the
_other_ hand, there had not been a far too strict historical law that
when a principle measures itself for the first time with its opposite it
must let itself be repressed by it ...”

What a delightful apologetic phrase! “Criticism _should have_ come to a
halt” if only it had been possible ... “to be able to come to a halt"!
Who “_should_” come to a halt? And who should have done what “it would
not have been possible ... to be able to do"? On the other hand!
Criticism should have proceeded “if _only_, on the other hand, there had
_not_ been a far _too_ strict historical law,” etc. Historical laws are
also “_far_ _too strict_” with Absolute Criticism! If only they did not
stand on the _opposite_ side to Critical Criticism, how brilliantly the
latter would proceed! But _à la guerre comme à la guerre_! In history,
Critical Criticism must allow itself to be made a sorry “story” of!

“If Criticism” (still Herr Bauer) “had to ... it will _at the same time_
be admitted that it always felt _uncertain_ when it gave in to demands
of this” (political) “kind, and that as a result of these demands it
came into contradiction with its _true_ _elements,_ a contradiction that
had _already_ found its _solution_ in those _elements_.”

Criticism was forced into political weaknesses by the all too strict
laws of history, but — it entreats — _it will at the same time be
admitted_ that it was above those weaknesses, if not in reality, at
least _in_ _itself._ Firstly, it had overcome them, “_in feeling_”, for
“it always felt uncertain in its demands”; it felt _ill at ease_ in
politics, it could not make out what was the matter with it. More- than
that! It came into contradiction with its _true elements_. And finally
the greatest thing of ally The contradiction with its true _elements_
into which it came found its solution not in the course of Criticism’s
_development_, but “_had_”, on the contrary, “_already_” found its
solution in Criticism’s true _elements_ existing independently of the
contradiction! These Critical elements can claim with pride: before
Abraham was, we were. Before the opposite to us was produced by
development, it lay yet unborn in our chaotic womb, dissolved, dead,
ruined. But since Criticism’s contradiction with its true elements “had
already found its solution” in the true elements of Criticism, and since
a _solved_ contradiction is _not_ a contradiction, it found itself, to
be precise, in no contradiction with its true elements, in _no_
contradiction with itself, and — the general aim of self-apology seems
attained.

Absolute Criticism’s self-apology has a whole _apologetical_ dictionary
at its disposal:

“not even properly speaking”, “only not noticed”, “there was besides”,
“not yet complete”, “although — nevertheless”, “not only — but mainly”,
“just as much, properly speaking, only”, “Criticism should have if only
it had been possible and if on the other hand”, “if ... it will _at the
same time_ be admitted”, “was it not 1. natural, was it not inevitable”,
“neither ...” etc.

Not so very long ago Absolute Criticism said the following about
apologetic phrases of this kind:

“'Although’ and ‘nevertheless’, ‘indeed’ and ‘but’, a heavenly ‘Nay’,
and an earthly ‘Yea’, are the main pillars of modern theology, the
stilts on which it strides along, the artifice to which its whole wisdom
is reduced, the phrase which recurs in all its phrases, its alpha and
omega” _(Das entdeckte Christenthum_, p. 102).



B) THE JEWISH QUESTION NO. 3


“Absolute Criticism” does not stop at proving by its autobiography its
own singular almightiness which “_properly speaking, first creates the
old,_ just as much as the _new_”. It does not stop at writing in
_person_ the apology of its past. It now sets third persons, the rest of
the secular world, the Absolute “Task”, the “task which is _much more_
important _now_”, the _apologia_ for Bauer’s deeds and “works”.

The _Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher_ published a criticism of Herr
Bauer’s _Die Judenfrage_ [K. Marx, On the Jewish Question]. His basic
error, the confusion of “_political_” with “_human_ emancipation”, was
revealed. True, the old Jewish question was not first brought into its
“_correct setting_”; the “Jewish question” was rather dealt with and
solved in the setting which recent developments have given to _old
questions of the day,_ and as a result of which the latter have become
“questions” of the present instead of “questions” of the past.

Absolute Criticism’s _third_ campaign, it seems, is intended to reply to
the _Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher_. First of all, Absolute Criticism
_admits_:

“In _Die Judenfrage_ the same ‘_oversight’_ was made — that of
identifying the _human_ with the _political_ essence.”

Criticism remarks:

“it would be too late to _reproach_ criticism for the stand which it
still maintained partially _two_ years ago.” “_The question is rather to
explain_ why _criticism_ ... even had to engage in politics.”

“_Two_ years ago?” We must reckon according to the _absolute_
chronology, from the birth of the Critical Redeemer of the world,
Bauer’s _Literatur-Zeitung_! The Critical world redeemer was born anno
_1843_. In the same year the second, enlarged edition of _Die
Judenfrage_ was published. The “Critical” treatment of the ,Jewish
question” in _Einundzwanzig Bogen aus der Schweiz_ appeared later in the
same year, 1843 old style.^([37]) _After the end_ of the _Deutsche
Jahrbücher_ and the _Rheinische Zeitung_, in the same momentous year
1843 old style, or anno 1 of the Critical era, appeared Herr Bauer’s
fantastic-political work _Staat, Religion und Parthei_, which exactly
repeated his old errors on the “_political_ essence”. The apologist is
forced to falsify _chronology_.

The “_explanation_” why Herr Bauer “_even had to_” engage in politics is
a matter of general interest only under certain conditions. If the
infallibility, purity and absoluteness of Critical Criticism are assumed
as _basic dogma_, then, of course, the facts contradicting that dogma
turn into riddles which are just as difficult, profound and mysterious
as the apparently ungodly deeds of God are for theologians.

If, on the other hand, “_the Critic_” is considered as a finite
individual, if he is not separated from the _limitations_ of his time,
one does not have to answer the question _why_ _he_ had to develop
_even_ within the world, because the _question_ itself does not exist.

If, however, Absolute Criticism insists on its demand, one can offer to
provide a little scholastic treatise dealing with the following
“_questions of the times_":

“Why had the Virgin Mary’s conception by the Holy Ghost to be proved by
no other than Herr Bruno Bauer?” “Why had Herr Bauer to prove that the
angel that appeared to Abraham was a _real_ emanation of God, an
emanation which, nevertheless, lacked the consistency necessary to
_digest food?_” _“_Why had Herr Bauer to provide an apologia for the
Prussian royal house and to raise the Prussian state to the rank of
_absolute_ state?” “Why had Herr Bauer, in his _Kritik der Synoptiker_,
to substitute ‘_infinite self-consciousness_’ for man?” “Why had Herr
Bauer in his _Das entdeckte Christenthum_ to repeat the _Christian
theory of creation_ in a _Hegelian_ form?” “Why had Herr Bauer to demand
of himself and others an ‘_explanation’_ of the miracle that he was
bound to be mistaken?”

While waiting for proofs of these necessities, which are just as
“Critical” as they are “Absolute”, let us listen once more to
“_Criticism’s_” apologetic evasions.

“The Jewish question ... had ... first to he brought into its _correct_
setting, as a _religious_ and _theological_ and as a _political_
question.” “As to the treatment and solution of both these questions,
_Criticism_ is _neither religious nor political_.”

The point is that the _Deutsch-Französische-Jahrbücher_ declares Bauer’s
treatment of the “Jewish question” to be _really_ theological and
_fantastic_-political.

First, “_Criticism_” replies to the “reproach” of _theological_
limitation.

“The Jewish question is a _religious_ question. The _Enlightenment_
claimed to solve it by describing the _religious contradiction_ as
_insignificant_ or even by denying it. _Criticism_, on the contrary, had
to present it in its purity.”

When we come to the _political_ part of the Jewish question we shall see
that in politics, too, Herr Bauer the theologian is not concerned with
politics but with theology.

But when the _Deutsch-Französische-Jahrbücher_ attacked his treatment of
the Jewish question as “_purely religious_”, it was concerned especially
with his article in _Einundzwanzig Bogen_, the title of which was:

“_Die Fähigkeit der hewigen Juden und Christen, frei zu werden_”.
"The Ability of Present-Day Jews and Christians to obtain Freedom.”

This article has nothing to do with the old “Enlightenment” . It
contains Herr Bauer’s _positive_ view on the ability of the present-day
Jews to be emancipated, that is, on the possibility of their
emancipation.

“Criticism” says:

“The Jewish question is a _religious_ question.”

The question is: _What is_ a _religious_ question? and, in particular,
_what is_ a religious question today?

The _theologian_ will judge by _appearances_ and see a _religious_
question in a religious question. But “Criticism” must remember the
explanation it gave Professor _Hinrichs_ that the _political_ interests
of the present time have _social_ significance, that it is “_no longer_
a question” of _political interests_.

The _Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher_ with equal right said to
Criticism: _Religious_ questions of the day have at the present time a
_social_ significance. It is no longer a question of _religious_
interests as _such_. Only the _theologian_ can believe it is a question
of religion as religion. Granted, the _Jahrbücher_ committed the _error_
of not stopping at the _word_ “_social_”. It characterised the real
position of the Jews in civil society today. Once Jewry was stripped
bare of the _religious_ shell and its empirical, worldly, practical
kernel was revealed, the practical, _really social_ way in which this
kernel is to be abolished could be indicated. Herr Bauer was content
with a “religious question” being a “religious question”.

It was by no means denied, as Herr Bauer _makes out_, that the Jewish
question is also a _religious_ question. On the contrary, it was shown
that Herr Bauer grasps _only the religious_ essence of Jewry, but not
the _secular_, _real basis_ of that religious essence. He combats
_religious consciousness_ as if it were something independent. Herr
Bauer therefore explains the _real_ Jews by the _Jewish religion_,
instead of explaining the mystery of the Jewish religion by the _real
Jews_. Herr Bauer therefore understands the Jew only insofar as he is an
immediate object of _theology_ or a _theologian_.

Consequently Herr Bauer has no inkling that real _secular_ Jewry, and
hence _religious_ Jewry _too_, is being continually produced by the
_present-day civil life_ and finds its final development in the _money
system._ He could not have any inkling of this because he did not know
Jewry as a part of the real world but only as a part of his world,
_theology_; because he, a pious, godly man, considers not the active
_everyday Jew_ but the hypocritical _Jew_ _of the Sabbath_ to be the
_real_ Jew. For Herr Bauer, as a theologian of the _Christian faith_,
the _world-historic_ significance of Jewry had to cease the _moment_
Christianity was _born_. Hence he had to repeat the old orthodox view
that it has maintained itself _in spite_ of history; and the old
theological superstition that Jewry exists only as a _confirmation_ of
the divine curse, as a _tangible proof_ of the Christian revelation had
to recur with him in the _Critical-theological_ form that it exists and
has existed only as _crude religious doubt_ about the supernatural
origin of Christianity, i.e., as a _tangible proof_ against Christian
revelation.

On the other hand, it was proved that Jewry has maintained. itself and
developed _through_ history, _in_ and _with_ history, and that this
development is to be perceived not by the eye of the theologian, but
only by the eye of the man of the world, because it is to be found, not
in _religious theory_, but only in _commercial_ and _industrial
practice_. It was explained why practical Jewry attains its full
development only in the fully developed Christian world, _why_ indeed it
is the fully developed _practice_ of the _Christian world itself._ The
existence of the _present-day_ Jew was not explained by his religion —
as though this religion were something apart, independently existing —
but the tenacious survival of the Jewish religion was explained by
practical features of civil society which are _fantastically_ reflected
in that religion. The emancipation of the Jews into human beings, or the
human emancipation of Jewry, was therefore not conceived, as by Herr
Bauer, as the special task of the Jews, but as a general practical task
of the present-day world, which is _Jewish_ to the core. It was proved
that the task of abolishing the essence of Jewry is actually the task of
abolishing the _Jewish character of civil society,_ abolishing the
inhumanity of the present-day practice of life, the most extreme
expression of which is the _money system_.

Herr Bauer, as a _genuine_, although _Critical_, _theologian_ or
_theological_ Critic, could not get beyond the _religious
contradiction_. In the attitude of the Jews to the Christian world he
could see only the attitude of the _Jewish religion_ to the _Christian
religion_. He even had to restore the religious contradiction in a
_Critical way_ — in the _antithesis_ between the attitudes of the Jew
and the Christian to _Critical_ religion — _atheism_, the last stage of
_theism_, the _negative_ recognition of God. Finally, in his
_theological fanaticism_ he had to _restrict_ the ability of the
“present-day Jews and Christians”, i.e., of the present-day world, “to
obtain freedom” to their ability to grasp “the Criticism” of theology
and apply it themselves. For the orthodox theologian the whole world is
dissolved in “religion and theology”. (He could just as well dissolve it
in politics, political economy, etc., and call _theology_ heavenly
_political economy_, for example, since it is the theory of the
production, distribution, exchange and consumption of “_spiritual
wealth_” and of the treasures of heaven!) Similarly, for the radical,
Critical theologian, the _ability_ of the world to achieve freedom, is
dissolved in the _single_ abstract ability to criticise “religion and
theology” as “religion and theology”. The only struggle he knows is the
struggle against the _religious_ limitations of self-consciousness,
whose Critical “_purity_” and “_infinity_” is just as much a theological
limitation.

Herr Bauer, therefore, dealt with the _religious_ and _theological_
question in the _religious_ and _theological_ way, if only because he
saw in the “religious” question of the time a “_purely religious_”
question. His “_correct setting_ of the question” set the question
“correctly” only in respect of his “_own ability_” — to answer!

Let us now go on to the political part of the _Jewish question_.

The _Jews_ (like the Christians) _are_ fully _politically emancipated_
in various states. Both Jews and Christians are far from being _humanly_
emancipated. Hence there must be a _difference_ between _political_ and
_human_ emancipation. The essence of political emancipation, i.e., of
the developed, modern state, must therefore be studied. On the other
hand, states which cannot yet _politically_ emancipate the Jews must be
rated by comparison with the perfected political state and shown to be
under-developed states.

That is the point of view from which the “_political_ emancipation” of
the Jews should have been dealt with and is dealt with in the
_Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher_.

Herr Bauer offers the following defence of “Criticism’s” _Die
Judenfrage_.

“The Jews were shown that they laboured under an illusion about _the
system_ from which they demanded freedom.”

Herr Bauer did show that the illusion of _the German Jews_ was to demand
the right to partake in the political community life in a land where
there was no political community and to demand _political rights_ where
only political privileges existed. On the other hand, Herr Bauer was
shown that he himself, no less than the Jews, laboured under “illusions”
about the “German political system”. For he explained the position of
the Jews in the German states as being due to the inability of “_the
Christian state_” to emancipate the Jews politically. Flying in the face
of the facts, he depicted the state of _privilege_, the
_Christian-Germanic_ state, as the Absolute Christian state. It was
proved to him, on the contrary, that the politically perfected, modern
state that knows no religious privileges is also the fully developed
_Christian_ state, and that therefore the fully developed Christian
state, not only can emancipate the Jews but has emancipated them and by
its very nature must emancipate them.

.’the Jews are shown ... that they are under the greatest illusion about
themselves when they think they are demanding _freedom_ and the
recognition of _free humanity_, whereas for them it is, and can be, only
a question of a special _privilege_.”

_Freedom! Recognition of free humanity! Special privilege!_ Edifying
words by which to by-pass certain questions apologetically!

_Freedom_? it was a question of political freedom. Herr Bauer was shown
that when the Jew demands freedom and nevertheless refuses to renounce
his religion, he “_is engaging in politics_” and sets no condition that
is contrary to _political_ freedom. Herr Bauer was shown that it is by
no means contrary to political emancipation to _divide_ man into the
non-religious citizen and the religious _private individual_. He was
shown that just as the state emancipates itself from religion by
emancipating itself from _state religion_ and leaving religion to itself
within civil society, so the individual emancipates himself
_politically_ from religion by regarding it no longer as a _public_
matter but as a _private matter_. Finally, it was shown that the
_terroristic_ attitude of the French Revolution to _religion_, far from
refuting this conception, bears it out.

Instead of studying the real attitude of the _modern_ state to religion,
Herr Bauer thought it necessary to imagine a _Critical_ state, a state
which is nothing but the _Critic of theology inflated into a state_ in
Herr Bauer’s imagination. If Herr Bauer is caught up in _politics_ he
continually makes politics a prisoner of his faith, _Critical_ faith.
Insofar as he deals with the state he always makes out of it an
_argument_ against “_the_ adversary”, _un-Critical_ religion and
theology. The state acts as executor of _Critical-theological_ cherished
desires.

When Herr Bauer had first freed himself from _orthodox_, un-Critical
_theology, political authority_ took for him the place of _religious
authority_. His faith in Jehovah changed into faith in the Prussian
state. In Bruno Bauer’s work _Die evangelische Landeskirche_ [B. Bauer,
Die evangelische Landeskirche Preussens und die Wissenschaft], not only
the Prussian state, but, quite consistently, the Prussian royal house
too, was made into an _absolute_. In reality Herr Bauer had no
_political_ interest in that state; its merit, in the eyes of
“Criticism”, was rather that it abolished dogmas by means of the
_Unified_ Church^([38]) and suppressed the dissenting sects with the
help of the police.

The political movement that began in the year 1840 redeemed Herr Bauer
from _his conservative politics_ and raised him for a moment to
_liberal_ politics. But here again politics was in reality only a
_pretext_ for theology. In his work _Die gute Sache der Freiheit und
meine eigene Angelegenheit_, the free state is the Critic of the
theological faculty in Bonn and an argument against religion. In _Die
Judenfrage_ the contradiction between state and religion is the main
interest, so that the criticism of political emancipation changes into a
criticism of the Jewish religion. In his latest political work, _Staat,
Religion und Parthei_, the most secret cherished desire of the Critic
inflated into a state is at last expressed. _Religion_ is _sacrificed_
to _the state_ or rather the state is only the _means_ by which the
opponent of “_Criticism_”, un-Critical religion and theology, is done to
death. Finally, after _Criticism_ has been redeemed, if only apparently,
from all politics by the socialist ideas, which have been spreading in
Germany from 1843 onwards, in the same way as it was redeemed from its
conservative politics by the political movement after 1840, it is
finally able to proclaim its writings against _un-Critical_ theology to
be social and to indulge unhindered in its own _Critical_ theology, the
contrasting of Spirit and Mass, as the annunciation of the Critical
Saviour and Redeemer of the world.

Let us return to our subject!

_Recognition of free humanity_? “Free humanity”, recognition of which
the Jews did not merely think they wanted, but really did want, is. the
same “free humanity” which found _classic_ recognition in the so-called
universal _rights of man_. Herr Bauer himself explicitly treated the
Jews’ efforts for recognition of their free humanity as their efforts to
obtain the universal _rights of man_.

In the _Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher_ it was demonstrated to Herr
Bauer that this “free humanity” and the “recognition” of it are nothing
but the recognition of the _egoistic civil individual_ and of the
_unrestrained_ movement of the spiritual and material elements which are
the content of his life situation, the content of _present-day_ civil
life; that the _rights of man_ do not, therefore, free man from
religion, but give him freedom of religion; that they do not free him
from property, but procure for him _freedom of property_; that they do
not free him from the filth of gain, but rather give him _freedom of
gainful occupation_.

It was shown that the _recognition of the rights of man_ by the _modern
state_ has no other meaning than the _recognition of slavery_ by the
_state of antiquity_ had. In other words, just as the ancient state had
slavery as its _natural basis_, the _modern state_ has as its _natural
basis_ civil society and the _man_ of civil society, i.e., the
independent man linked with other men ‘ only by the ties of private
interest and _unconscious_ natural necessity, the _slave_ of labour for
gain and of his own as well as other men’s _selfish_ need. The modern
state has recognised this its natural basis as such in the _universal
rights of man_. It did not create it. As it was the product of civil
society driven beyond the old political bonds by its own development,
the modern state, for its part, now recognised the womb from which it
sprang and its basis by the _declaration_ of the _rights of man_. Hence,
the political emancipation of the Jews and the granting to them of the
“_rights of man_” is an act the two sides of which are mutually
dependent. Herr _Riesser_ correctly expresses the meaning of the Jews’
desire for recognition of their free humanity when he demands, among
other things, the freedom of movement. sojourn, travel, earning one’s
living, etc. These manifestations of “_free humanity_” are explicitly
recognised as such in the French Declaration of the Rights of Man. The
Jew has all the more right to the recognition of his “free humanity” as
“free civil society” is of a thoroughly commercial and Jewish nature,
and the Jew is a necessary member of it. The _Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher_ further demonstrated why the member of civil society is
called, _par excellence_, “Man” and why the rights of man are called
“inborn rights”.

The only Critical thing Criticism could say about the rights of man was
that they are not inborn but arose in the course of history. That much
_Hegel_ had already told us. Finally, to its assertion that both Jews
and Christians, in order to grant or receive the universal rights of
man, _must_ _sacrifice the privilege of_ faith — the Critical theologian
supposes his _one_ fixed idea at the basis of all things — there was
specially counterposed the fact contained in all un-Critical
declarations of the rights of man that the _right_ to believe what one
wishes, the right to practise any religion, is explicitly recognised as
a _universal right of man_. Besides, “_Criticism_” should have known
that Hébert’s party in particular was defeated on the pretext that it
attacked the rights of man by attacking _freedom of religion_ ^([39]),
and that similarly the rights of man were invoked later when freedom of
worship was restored.^([40])

“As far as _political_ essence is concerned, _Criticism_ followed its
contradictions to the point where the _contradiction between theory and
practice_ had been most thoroughly elaborated during the past fifty
years — to the _French representative system_, in which the freedom of
theory is disavowed by practice and the freedom of practical life seeks
in vain its expression in theory.

“Now that the basic illusion has been done away with, _the
contradiction_ proved in the _debates in the French Chamber_, the
contradiction between _free theory_ and the _practical validity of
privileges_, between the legal validity of privileges and a _public
system_ in which the _egoism of the pure individual_ tries to dominate
the _exclusivity of the privileged_, should be conceived as a _general
contradiction_ in this sphere.”

The contradiction that Criticism proved in the debates in the French
Chamber was nothing but a contradiction of _constitutionalism_. Had
Criticism grasped it as a _general_ contradiction it would have grasped
the general contradiction of constitutionalism. Had it gone still
further than in its opinion it “should have” gone, had it, to be
precise, gone as far as the _abolition_ of this general contradiction,
it would have proceeded correctly from constitutional _monarchy_ to
arrive at the _democratic representative state,_ the perfected modern
state. Far from having criticised the essence of political emancipation
and proved its definite relation to the essence of man, it would have
arrived only at the _fact_ of political emancipation, at the fully
developed modern state, that is to say, only at the point where the
existence of the modern state conforms to its essence and where,
therefore, not only the relative, but the absolute _imperfections_,
those which constitute its very essence, can be observed and described.

The above-quoted “Critical” passage is all the more valuable as it
proves beyond any doubt that at the very moment when _Criticism_ sees
the “_political essence_” far below itself, it is, on the contrary, far
below the political essence; it still needs to find in the latter the
solution of its own contradictions and it still persists in not giving a
thought to the _modern principle of the state._

To “_free theory_” Criticism contrasts the “_practical validity of
privileges_”; to the “_legal validity of privileges_” it contrasts the
“_public system_”.

In order not to misinterpret the opinion of _Criticism_, let us recall
the contradiction it proved in the debates in the French Chamber, the
very contradiction which “should have been conceived” as a _general_
one. One of the questions dealt with was the fixing of a day in the week
on which children would be freed from work. _Sunday_ was suggested. One
deputy moved to leave out mention of Sunday in the law as being
unconstitutional. The Minister Martin (du Nord) saw in this motion an
attempt to proclaim that Christianity had ceased to exist. Monsieur
Crémieux declared on behalf of the French Jews that the Jews, out of
respect for the religion of the great majority of Frenchmen, did not
object to Sunday being mentioned. Now, according to free theory, Jews
and Christians are equal, but according to this practice Christians have
a privilege over Jews; for otherwise how could the Sunday of the
Christians have a place in a law made for all Frenchmen? Should not the
Jewish Sabbath have the same right, etc.? Or in the practical life of
the French too, the Jew is not really oppressed by Christian privileges;
but the law does not dare to express this practical equality. All the
contradictions in the political essence expounded by Herr Bauer in _Die
Judenfrage_ are of this kind — contradictions of _constitutionalism_,
which is, in general, the contradiction between the modern
representative state and the old state of privileges.

Herr Bauer is committing a very serious oversight when he thinks he is
rising from the _political_ to the _human_ essence by conceiving and
criticising this contradiction as a “general” one. He would thus only
rise from partial political emancipation to full Political emancipation,
from the constitutional state to the democratic representative state.

Herr Bauer thinks that by the abolition of _privilege_ the _object_ of
privilege is also abolished. Concerning the statement of Monsieur Martin
(du Nord), he says:

“_There is no longer any religion_ when _there is no longer any
privileged religion_. Take from religion its exclusive power and it will
no longer exist.”

Just as _industrial_ activity is not abolished when the _privileges of
the trades_, guilds and corporations are abolished, but, on the
contrary, real _industry_ begins only after the abolition of these
privileges; just as _ownership of the land_ is not abolished when
_privileged_ land-ownership is abolished, but, on the contrary, begins
its universal movement only with the abolition of privileges and with
the free division and free sale of land; just as _trade_ is not
abolished by the abolition of _trade privileges_, but finds its true
realisation in free trade; so religion develops in its _practical_
universality only where there is no _privileged_ religion (cf. the North
American States).

The modern “_public system_”, the developed modern state, is not based,
as _Criticism_ thinks, on a society of privileges, but on a society in
which _privileges have been abolished_ and _dissolved,_ on developed
_civil society_ in which the vital elements which were still politically
bound under the privilege system have been set free. Here _no
“privileged exclusivity_,” stands opposed either to any other
exclusivity or to the public system. Free industry and free trade
abolish privileged exclusivity and thereby the struggle between the
privileged exclusivities. They replace exclusivity with man freed from
privilege — which isolates from the general totality but at the same
time unites in a smaller exclusive totality — man no longer bound to
other men even by the _semblance_ of a common bond. Thus they produce
the universal struggle of man against man, individual against
individual. In the same way _civil_ _society_ as a whole is this war
against one another of all individuals, who are no longer isolated from
one another by anything but their _individuality_, and the universal
unrestrained movement of the elementary forces of life freed from the
fetters of privilege. ‘the contradiction between the _democratic
representative state_ and _civil society_ is the completion of the
_classic_ contradiction between public _commonweal_ and _slavery_. In
the modern world each person is _at the same time_ a member of slave
society and of the public commonweal. Precisely the _slavery of civil
society is in appearance_ the greatest _freedom_ because it is in
appearance the fully developed independence of the individual, who
considers as his _own_ freedom the uncurbed movement, no longer bound by
a common bond or by man, of the estranged elements of his life, such as
property, industry, religion, etc., whereas actually this is his fully
developed slavery and inhumanity. _Law_ has here taken the place of
_privilege_.

It is therefore only here, where we find no contradiction between free
theory and the practical validity of privilege, but, on the contrary,
the practical abolition of privilege, _free_ industry, _free_ trade,
etc., conform to “free theory”, where the public system is not opposed
by any privileged exclusivity, where the contradiction expounded by
Criticism is _abolished_ — only here is the _fully developed modern
state to be found_.

Here also reigns the _reverse_ of the law which Herr Bauer, on the
occasion of the debates in the French Chamber, formulated in perfect
agreement with Monsieur Martin (du Nord):

“Just as M. Martin (du Nord) saw the proposal to omit mention of
_Sunday_ in the _law_ as a motion to declare that Christianity has
ceased to exist, with equal reason _(and this reason is very well
founded_) — the declaration that the _law of the Sabbath_ is no longer
binding on the Jews would he _a proclamation abolishing Judaism_.”

It is just _the opposite_ in the developed modern state. The state
declares that religion, like the other elements of civil life, only
_begins_ to exist in its full scope when the state declares it to be
_non-political_ and therefore leaves it to itself. To the dissolution of
the _political_ existence of these elements, as for example, the:
dissolution of _property_ by the abolition of the _property
qualification for electors_, the dissolution of _religion_ by the
abolition of the _state church_, to this proclamation of their civil
death corresponds their most vigorous life, which henceforth obeys its
own laws undisturbed and develops to its full scope.

_Anarchy_ is the law of civil society emancipated from divisive
privileges, and the _anarchy of. civil society_ is the basis of the
modern _public system_, just as the public system in its turn is the
guarantee of that anarchy. To the same great extent that the two are
opposed to each other they also determine each other.

h is clear how capable _Criticism_ is of assimilating the “new”. But if
we remain within the bounds of “pure Criticism”, the question arises:
Why did Criticism not conceive as a _universal_ contradiction the
contradiction which it disclosed in connection with the debates in the
French Chamber, although in its own opinion that is what it “_should
have_” been done?

“That step _was_, however, then _impossible_ — not only because ... not
only because ... _but also_ because without that _last remnant_ of inner
involvement with its opposite Criticism _was impossible_ and _could not
have come to the point_ from which only _one step_ remained to be
taken.” [Here and below quotations are taken from the article “Was ist
jetzt der Gegenstand der Kritik?”, Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft
VIII.]

It was impossible ... because ... it was impossible! _Criticism_ assures
us, moreover, that the fateful “_one step_” necessary .,to come to the
point from which only one step remained to be taken” was impossible. Who
will dispute that? In order to be able to come to a point from which
only “_one step_” remains to be taken, it is absolutely impossible to
take that “_one step_” more which leads over the point beyond which
still “_one step_” remains to be taken.

All’s well that ends well! At the end of the encounter with the _Mass_,
which is hostile to _Criticism’s Die Judenfrage_, “_Criticism_” admits
that its conception of the “_rights of man_”, _its_

“appraisal of religion in the French Revolution”, the “free political
essence it pointed to occasionally _at the conclusion of its_
considerations”, in short, the whole ‘.period of the French Revolution,
was for _Criticism_ neither more nor less than a symbol — that is to
say, not the period of the revolutionary efforts of the French in the
exact and prosaic sense — a symbol and therefore only a fantastic
expression of the shapes which it saw at the end”.

We shall not deprive _Criticism_ of the consolation that when it sinned
politically it did so only at the “conclusion” and at the “end” of its
works. A notorious drunkard used to console himself with the thought
that he was never drunk before midnight.

In the sphere of the “Jewish question”, _Criticism_ has indisputably
been winning more and more ground from _the_ Enemy. In No. 1 of the
“Jewish question”, the treatise of “_Criticism_” defended by Herr Bauer
was still absolute and revealed the “_true_” and “_general_”
significance of the “Jewish question”. In No. 2 _Criticism_ had neither
the “_will_” nor the “_right_” to go beyond _Criticism_. In No. 3 it had
still to take “_one step_”, but that step was “impossible” — because it
was — “impossible”. It was not its “will or right” but its involvement
in its “opposite” that prevented it from taking that _one step_”. It
would very much have liked to clear the last obstacle, but unfortunately
a _last remnant of Mass_ stuck to its Critical seven-league boots.



C) CRITICAL BATTLE AGAINST THE FRENCH REVOLUTION


The _narrow-mindedness of the Mass_ forced the “Spirit”, _Criticism_,
Herr Bauer, to consider the _French Revolution_ not as the time of the
revolutionary efforts of the French in the “_prosaic sense_” but
“_only_” as the “_symbol_ and _fantastic expression_” of the Critical
figments of his own brain. _Criticism_ does _penance_ for its
“_oversight_” by submitting the _Revolution_ to a _fresh examination_.
At the same time it punishes the seducer of its innocence — “the Mass” —
by communicating to it the results of this “fresh examination”.

“The _French Revolution_ was an experiment which still belonged entirely
to the eighteenth century.”

The chronological truth that an experiment of the eighteenth century
like the French Revolution is still entirely an experiment of the
eighteenth century, and not, for example, an experiment of the
nineteenth, seems “still entirely” to be one of those truths which “are
self-evident from the start”. But in the terminology of criticism, which
is very prejudiced against “crystal-clear” truths, a truth like that is
called an “_examination_” and therefore naturally has its place in a
“fresh examination of the Revolution”.

“The ideas to which the French Revolution gave rise did not, however,
lead beyond the _order of things_ that it wanted to abolish by force.”

_Ideas_ can never lead beyond an old world order but only beyond the
ideas of the old world order. Ideas _cannot carry out anything_ at all.
In order to carry out ideas men are needed who can exert practical
force. In its literal _sense_ the Critical sentence is therefore another
truth that is self-evident, and therefore another “_examination_”.

Undeterred by this examination, the French Revolution gave rise to ideas
which led beyond the _ideas_ of the entire old world order. The
revolutionary movement which began in 1789 in the _Cercle Social,_
^([41]) which in the middle of its course had as its chief
representatives _Leclerc_ and _Roux_, and which finally with _Babeuf’s_
conspiracy was temporarily defeated, gave rise to the communist idea
which _Babeuf’s_ friend _Buonarroti_ re-introduced in France after the
Revolution of 1830. This idea, consistently developed, is the _idea_ of
the _new world order_.

“After the Revolution had therefore” (!) “abolished the feudal barriers
in the fife of the people, it was compelled to satisfy and even to
inflame the pure egoism of the nation and, on the other hand, to curb it
by its necessary complement, the recognition of a supreme being, by this
higher confirmation of the general state System, which has to hold
together the individual self-seeking atoms.”

The egoism of the nation is the natural egoism of the general state
system, as opposed to the egoism of the feudal classes. The supreme
being is the higher confirmation of the general state system, and hence
also of the nation. Nevertheless, the supreme being is supposed to curb
the egoism of the nation, that is, of the general state system! A really
Critical task, to _curb_ egoism by means of its confirmation and even of
its _religious_ confirmation, i.e., by recognising that it is of a
superhuman nature and therefore free of human restraint! The creators of
the supreme being were not aware of this, their Critical intention.

Monsieur _Buchez_, who bases national fanaticism on religious
fanaticism, understands his hero _Robespierre_ better .^([42])

Nationalism [_Nationalität_] led to the downfall of Rome and Greece.
_Criticism_ therefore says nothing specific about the French Revolution
when it maintains that nationalism caused its downfall, and it says just
as little about the nation when it defines its egoism as _pure_. This
pure egoism appears rather to be a very dark, spontaneous egoism,
combined with flesh and blood, when compared, for example, with the pure
egoism of _Fichte’s_ “_ego_”. But if, in contrast to the egoism of the
feudal classes, its purity is only relative, no “fresh examination of
the revolution” was needed to see that the egoism which has a nation as
its content is more general or purer than that which has as its content
a particular social class or a particular corporation.

_Criticism’s_ explanations about the general state system are no less
instructive. They are confined to saying that the general state system
must hold together the individual self-seeking atoms.

Speaking exactly and in the prosaic sense, the members of civil society
are not _atoms_. The _specific property_ of the atom is that it has no
properties and is therefore not connected with beings outside it by any
relationship determined by its own _natural necessity_. The atom _has no
needs_, it is _self-sufficient_., the world outside it is an absolute
_vacuum_, i.e., is contentless, senseless, meaningless, just because the
atom has _all fullness_ in itself. The egoistic individual in civil
society may in his non-sensuous imagination and lifeless abstraction
inflate himself into an _atom_, i.e., into an unrelated,
self-sufficient, wantless, _absolutely full_, blessed being. Unblessed
_sensuous reality_ does not bother about his imagination, each of his
senses compels him to believe in the existence of the world and of
individuals outside him, and even his _profane_ stomach reminds him
every day that the world _outside_ him is not _empty_, but is what
really _fills_. Every activity and property of his being, every one of
his vital urges, becomes a _need_, a _necessity_, which his
_self-seeking_ transforms into seeking for other things and human beings
outside him. But since the need of one individual has no self-evident
meaning for another egoistic individual capable of satisfying that need,
and therefore no direct connection with its satisfaction, each
individual has to create this connection; it thus becomes the
intermediary between the need of another and the objects of this need.
Therefore, it is _natural necessity_, the _essential human properties_
however estranged they may seem to be, and _interest_ that hold the
members of civil society together; _civil_, not _political_ life is
their _real_ tie. It is therefore not the _state_ that holds the _atoms_
of civil society together, but the fact that they are _atoms_ only in
_imagination_ in the _heaven_ of their fancy, but in _reality_ beings
tremendously different from atoms, in other words, not _divine egoists,_
but _egoistic human beings_. Only political superstition still imagines
today that civil life must be held together by the state, whereas in
reality, on the contrary, the state is held together by civil life.

“_Robespierre’s_ and _Saint-Just’s_ tremendous idea of making a ‘_free
people’_ which would live only according to the rules of justice and
_virtue_ — see, for example, Saint-Just’s report on Danton’s crimes and
his other report on the general police — could be maintained for a
certain time only by terror and was a _contradiction against which_ the
vulgar, self-seeking elements of _the popular community_ reacted in the
cowardly and insidious way that was only to he expected from them..,

This phrase of _Absolute Criticism_, which describes a “free people” as
a “_contradiction_” _against_ which the elements of the “_popular
community_” are bound to react, is absolutely hollow, for according to
Robespierre and Saint-just _liberty_, _justice_ and _virtue_ could, on
the contrary, be only manifestations of the life of the “_people_” and
only properties of the “popular community”. Robespierre and Saint-just
spoke explicitly of “liberty, justice and virtue” of _ancient times_,
belonging only to the “_popular community_”. _Spartans_, _Athenians_ and
_Romans_ at the time of their greatness were “free, just and virtuous
peoples”.

“What,” asks Robespierre in his speech on the principles of public
morals (sitting of the Convention on February 5, 1794), “is the
_fundamental principle_ of democratic or popular government? It is
_virtue_, I mean _public_ virtue, which worked such miracles in _Greece_
and _Rome_ and which will work still greater ones in Republican France;
virtue which is nothing but love of one’s country and its laws.” ^([43])

Robespierre then explicitly calls the _Athenians_ and _Spartans_
“_peuples libres_”. He continually recalls the ancient _popular commune_
and quotes its heroes as well as its corrupters — Lycurgus, Demosthenes,
Miltiades, Aristides, Brutus and Catilina, Caesar, Clodius and Piso.

In his report on Danton’s arrest (referred to by Criticism) _Saint-Just_
says explicitly:

“The world has been empty since the _Romans_, and only their memory
fills it and still prophesies liberty.” ^([44])

His accusation is composed in the ancient style and directed against
_Danton_ as against _Catilina_.

In _Saint-Just’s_ other report, the one on the general police, ^([45])
the _republican_ is described exactly in the _ancient_ sense, as
_inflexible_, _modest, simple_ and so on. The _police_ should be an
institution of the same nature as the Roman _censorship_. — He does not
fail to mention Codrus, Lycurgus, Caesar, Cato, Catilina, Brutus,
Antonius, and Cassius. Finally, _Saint-Just_ describes the “_liberty_,
justice and virtue” that he demands in a _single word_ when he says:

“Que les hommes révolutionnaires soient des _Romains_."
["Let revolutionary men he Romans."]

Robespierre, Saint-just and their party fell because they confused the
ancient, _realistic-democratic commonweal_ based on _real slavery_ with
the _modern spiritualistic-democratic representative state,_ which is
based on _emancipated slavery, bourgeois society._ What a terrible
illusion it is to have to recognise and sanction in the _rights of man_
modern bourgeois society, the society of industry, of universal
competition, of private interest freely pursuing its aims, of anarchy,
of self-estranged natural and spiritual individuality, and at the same
time to want afterwards to annul the _manifestations of the life_ of
this society in particular individuals and simultaneously to want to
model the _political head_ of that society in the manner of antiquity!

The illusion appears tragic when Saint-Just, on the day of his
execution, pointed to the large table of the _Rights of Man_ hanging in
the hall of the _Conciergerie_ and said with proud dignity: “_C'est
pourtant moi qui ai fait cela_” [Yet it was I who made that] It was just
this table that proclaimed the _right_ of a _man_ who cannot be the man
of the ancient commonweal any more than his _economic_ and _industrial_
conditions are those of _ancient_ times.

This is not the place to vindicate the illusion of the _Terrorists_
historically.

“After the fall of Robespierre the _political enlightenment_ and
_movement_ hastened to the point where they became the prey of
_Napoleon_ who, shortly after 18 Brumaire, could say: ‘With my prefects,
gendarmes and priests I can do what I like with France.'”

_Profane_ history, on the other hand, reports: After the fall of
Robespierre, the _political_ enlightenment, which formerly had been
_overreaching_ itself and had been _extravagant_, began for the first
time to develop _prosaically_. Under the government of the
_Directory_,^([46]) _bourgeois_ _society,_ freed by the Revolution
itself from the trammels of feudalism and officially recognised in spite
of the _Terror’s_ wish to sacrifice it to an ancient form of political
life, broke out in powerful streams of life. A storm and stress of
commercial enterprise, a passion for enrichment, the exuberance of the
new bourgeois life, whose first self-enjoyment is pert, light-hearted,
frivolous and intoxicating; a _real_ enlightenment of the _land_ of
France, the feudal structure of which had been smashed by the hammer of
the Revolution and which, by the first feverish efforts of the numerous
new owners, had become the object of all-round cultivation; the first
moves of industry that had now become free — these were some of the
signs of life of the newly emerged bourgeois society. _Bourgeois
society_ is _positively_ represented by the _bourgeoisie_. The
bourgeoisie, therefore, _begins_ its rule. The _rights of man_ cease to
exist _merely_ in _theory_.

It was not the revolutionary movement as a whole that became the prey of
Napoleon on 18 Brumaire, as _Criticism_ in its faith in a Herr von
Rotteck or Welcker believes ^([47]); it was the _liberal bourgeoisie_.
One only needs to read the speeches of the legislators of the time to be
convinced of this. One has the impression of coming from the National
Convention into a modern Chamber of Deputies.

_Napoleon_ represented the last battle of _revolutionary terror_ against
the _bourgeois society_ which had been proclaimed by this same
Revolution, and against its policy. Napoleon, of course, already
discerned the essence of the _modern state_; he understood that it is
based on the unhampered development of bourgeois society, on the free
movement of private interest, etc. He decided to recognise and protect
this basis. He was no terrorist with his head in the clouds. Yet at the
same time he still regarded the _state_ as an _end in itself_ and civil
life only as a treasurer and his _subordinate_ which must have no _will
of its own_. He _perfected_ the _Terror_ by _substituting permanent war_
for _permanent revolution_. He fed the egoism of the French nation to
complete satiety but demanded also the sacrifice of bourgeois business,
enjoyments, wealth, etc., whenever this was required by the political
aim of conquest. If he despotically suppressed the liberalism of
bourgeois society — the political idealism of its daily practice — he
showed no more consideration for its essential _material_ interests,
trade and industry, whenever they conflicted with his political
interests. His scorn of industrial _hommes d'affaires_ was the
complement to his scorn of _ideologists._ In his home policy, too, he
combated bourgeois society as the opponent of the state which in his own
person he still held to be an absolute aim in itself. Thus he declared
in the State Council that he would not suffer the owner of extensive
estates to cultivate them or not as he pleased. Thus, too, he conceived
the plan of subordinating trade to the state by appropriation of
_roulage_ [road haulage]. French businessmen took steps to anticipate
the event that first shook Napoleon’s power. Paris exchange- brokers
forced him by means of an artificially created famine to delay the
opening of the Russian campaign by nearly two months and thus to launch
it too late in the year.

Just as the liberal bourgeoisie was opposed once more by revolutionary
terror in the person of Napoleon, so it was opposed once more by
counter-revolution in the Restoration in the person of the Bourbons.
Finally, in 1830 the bourgeoisie put into effect its wishes of the year
1789, with the only difference that its _political_ _enlightenment_ was
now _completed_, that it no longer considered the constitutional
representative state as a means for achieving the ideal of the state,
the welfare of the world and universal human aims but, on the contrary,
had acknowledged it as the _official_ expression of its own _exclusive_
power and the _political_ recognition of its own _special_ interests.

The history of the French Revolution, which dates from 1789, did not
come to an end in 1830 with the victory of one of its components
enriched by the consciousness of its own _social_ importance.

d) Critical Battle Against French Materialism

“_Spinozism_ dominated the eighteenth century both in its later French
variety, which made matter into substance, and in deism, which conferred
on matter a more spiritual name.... _Spinoza’s French school_ and the
supporters of deism were but two sects disputing over the true meaning
of _his system_.... The simple fate of this Enlightenment was its
decline in _romanticism_ after being obliged to surrender to the
reaction which began after the French movement.”

That is what _Criticism_ says.

To the Critical history of French materialism we shall oppose a brief
outline of its ordinary, mass-type history. We shall acknowledge with
due respect the abyss between history as it really happened and history
as it takes place according to the decree of “_Absolute Criticism_”, the
creator equally of the old and of the new. And finally, obeying the
prescriptions of _Criticism_, we shall make the “Why?”, “Whence?” and
“Whither?” of Critical history the “object of a persevering study”.

“Speaking _exactly_ and in the _prosaic sense_”, the French
Enlightenment of the eighteenth century, and in particular _French
materialism_, was not only a struggle against the existing political
institutions and the existing religion and theology; it was just as much
an _open, clearly expressed_ struggle against the _metaphysics of the
seventeenth century_, and against all _metaphysics_, in particular that
of _Descartes, Malebranche, Spinoza_ and _Leibniz_. Philosophy was
counterposed to _metaphysics_, just as _Feuerbach_, in his first
resolute attack on _Hegel_, counterposed _sober philosophy_ to _wild
speculation_. Seventeenth century _metaphysics_, driven from the field
by the _French Enlightenment_, notably, by French materialism of the
eighteenth century, experienced a _victorious and substantial
restoration_ in _German philosophy_, particularly in _the speculative
German philosophy_ of the nineteenth century. After _Hegel_ linked it in
a masterly fashion with all subsequent metaphysics and with German
idealism and founded a metaphysical universal kingdom, the attack on
theology again corresponded, as in the eighteenth century, to an attack
on _speculative metaphysics_ and _metaphysics in general_. It will be
defeated for ever by _materialism_, which has now been perfected by the
work of _speculation_ itself and coincides with _humanism_. But just as
_Feuerbach_ is the representative of _materialism_ coinciding with
_humanism_ in the _theoretical_ domain, French and English _socialism_
and _communism_ represent materialism coinciding with _humanism_ in the
_practical_ domain.

“Speaking _exactly_ and in the _prosaic sense_”, there are _two trends_
in _French materialism_; one traces its origin to _Descartes,_ the other
to _Locke._ The latter is _mainly_ a _French_ development and leads
directly to _socialism_. The former, _mechanical_ materialism, merges
with French _natural science_ proper. The two trends intersect in the
course of development. We have no need here to go more deeply into the
French materialism that derives directly from _Descartes,_ any more than
into the French school of _Newton_ and the development of French natural
science in general.

We shall therefore merely say the following:

_Descartes_ in his _physics_ endowed _matter_ with self-creative power
and conceived _mechanical_ motion as the manifestation of its life. He
completely separated his _physics_ from his _metaphysics_. _Within_ his
physics, _matter_ is the sole _substance_, the sole basis of being and
of knowledge.

_Mechanical_ French materialism adopted _Descartes’ physics_ in
opposition to his metaphysics. His followers were by profession
_anti-metaphysicians_, i.e., _physicists_.

This school begins with the _physician_ _Le Roy,_ reaches its zenith
with the physician _Cabanis_, and the physician _La Mettrie_ is its
centre. Descartes was still living when Le Roy, like _La Mettrie_ in the
eighteenth century, transposed the Cartesian structure of the animal to
the human soul and declared that the soul is a _modus of the body_ and
_ideas_ are _mechanical motions_. Le Roy even thought Descartes had kept
his real opinion secret. Descartes protested. At the end of the
eighteenth century _Cabanis_ perfected Cartesian materialism in his
treatise: _Rapport du physique et du moral de 1'homme_.^([48])

_Cartesian_ materialism still exists today in France. It has achieved
great successes in _mechanical natural science_ which, “speaking
_exactly_ and in the _prosaic_ _sense_”, will be least of all reproached
with _romanticism_.

The _metaphysics_ of the seventeenth century, represented in France by
_Descartes,_ had _materialism_ as its _antagonist_ from its very birth.
The latter’s opposition to Descartes was personified by _Gassendi_, the
restorer of _Epicurean_ materialism. French and English materialism was
always closely related to _Democritus_ and _Epicurus_. Cartesian
metaphysics had another opponent in the _English_ materialist _Hobbes_.
Gassendi and Hobbes triumphed over their opponent long after their death
at the very time when metaphysics was already officially dominant in all
French schools.

_Voltaire_ pointed out that the indifference of the French of the
eighteenth century to the disputes between the Jesuits and the
Jansenists^([49]) was due less to philosophy than to _Law’s_ financial
speculations. So the downfall of seventeenth-century metaphysics can be
explained by the materialistic theory of the eighteenth century only in
so far as this theoretical movement itself is explained by the practical
nature of French life at that time. This life was turned to the
immediate present, to worldly enjoyment and worldly interests, to the
_earthly_ world. Its anti-theological, anti-metaphysical, materialistic
practice demanded corresponding anti-theological, anti-metaphysical,
materialistic theories. Metaphysics had _in practice_ lost all credit.
Here we have only to indicate briefly the _theoretical_ course of
events.

In the seventeenth century metaphysics (cf. Descartes, Leibniz, and
others) still contained a _positive_, secular element. It made
discoveries in mathematics, physics and other exact sciences which
seemed to come within its scope. This semblance was done away with as
early as the beginning of the eighteenth century. The positive sciences
broke away from metaphysics and marked out their independent fields. The
whole wealth of metaphysics now consisted only of beings of thought and
heavenly things, at the very time when real beings and earthly things
began to be the centre of all interest. Metaphysics had become insipid.
In the very year in which Malebranche and Arnauld, the last great French
metaphysicians of the seventeenth century, died, _Helvétius_ and
_Condillac_ were born.

The man who deprived seventeenth-century metaphysics and metaphysics in
general of all _credit_ in the domain of _theory_ was _Pierre Bayle_.
His weapon was _scepticism_, which he forged out of metaphysics’ own
magic formulas. He himself proceeded at first from Cartesian
metaphysics. Just as _Feuerbach_ by combating speculative theology was
driven further to combat _speculative philosophy_, precisely because he
recognised in speculation the last drop of theology, because he had to
force theology to retreat from pseudo-science to _crude_, repulsive
_faith_, so Bayle too was driven by religious doubt to doubt about the
metaphysics which was the prop of that faith. He therefore critically
investigated metaphysics in its entire historical development. He became
its historian in order to write the history of its death. He refuted
chiefly _Spinoza_ and _Leibniz_.

Pierre Bayle not only prepared the reception of materialism and of the
philosophy of common sense in France by shattering metaphysics with his
scepticism. He heralded the _atheistic society_ which was soon to come
into existence by proving that a society consisting only of atheists is
_possible,_ that an atheist can be a man worthy of respect, and that it
is not by atheism but by superstition and idolatry that man debases
himself.

To quote a French writer, _Pierre Bayle_ was “the last metaphysician in
the sense of the seventeenth century and _the first philosopher in the
sense of the eighteenth century_”.

Besides the negative refutation of seventeenth-century theology and
metaphysics, a _positive, anti-metaphysical_ system was required. A book
was needed which would systematise and theoretically substantiate the
life practice of that time. _Locke’s_ treatise _An Essay Concerning
Humane Understanding_ came from across the Channel as if in answer to a
call. It was welcomed enthusiastically like a long-awaited guest.

The question arises: Is _Locke_ perhaps a disciple of _Spinoza_?
“Profane” history can answer:

Materialism is the _natural-born_ son of _Great Britain_.^([50]) Already
the British schoolman, _Duns Scotus_, asked, “_whether it was impossible
for matter to think_?”

In order to effect this miracle, he took refuge in God’s omnipotence,
i.e., he made _theology_ preach _materialism_. Moreover, he was a
nominalist.^([51]) Nominalism, the _first form_ of materialism, is
chiefly found among the _English_ schoolmen.

The real progenitor of _English materialism_ and all _modern
experimental_ science is _Bacon_. To him natural philosophy is the only
true philosophy, and _physics_ based upon the experience of the senses
is the chiefest part of natural philosophy. _Anaxagoras_ and his
_homoeomeriae_ ^([52]), _Democritus_ and his atoms, he often quotes as
his authorities. According to him the _senses_ are infallible and the
_source_ of all knowledge. All science is based on _experience_, and
consists in subjecting the data furnished by the senses to a _rational
method_ of investigation. Induction, analysis, comparison, observation,
experiment, are the principal forms of such a rational method. Among the
qualities inherent in _matter_, _motion_ is the first and foremost, not
only in the form of _mechanical_ and _mathematical_ motion, _but_
chiefly in the form of an _impulse_, a _vital_ _spirit_, a _tension_ —
or a ‘_Qual’,_^([52a]) to use a term of Jakob Böhme’s — of matter. The
primary forms of matter are the living, individualising _forces of
being_ inherent in it and producing the distinctions between the
species.

In _Bacon_, its first creator, materialism still holds back within
itself in a naive way the germs of a many-sided development. On the one
hand, matter, surrounded by a sensuous, poetic glamour, seems to attract
man’s whole entity by winning smiles. On the other, the aphoristically
formulated doctrine pullulates with inconsistencies imported from
theology.

In its further evolution, materialism becomes _one-sided. Hobbes_ is the
man who _systematises Baconian_ materialism. Knowledge based upon the
senses loses its poetic blossom, it passes into the abstract experience
of the _geometrician_. _Physical_ motion is sacrificed to _mechanical_
or _mathematical_ motion; _geometry_ is proclaimed as the queen of
sciences. Materialism takes to _misanthropy_. If it is to overcome its
opponent, _misanthropic, fleshless_ spiritualism, and that on the
latter’s own ground, materialism has to chastise its own flesh and turn
_ascetic_. Thus it passes into an _intellectual entity_; but thus, too,
it evolves all the consistency, regardless of consequences,
characteristic of the intellect.

Hobbes, as Bacon’s continuator, argues thus: if all human knowledge is
furnished by the senses, then our concepts, notions, and ideas are but
the phantoms of the real world, more or less divested of its sensual
form. Philosophy can but give names to these phantoms. One name may be
applied to more than one of them. There may even be names of names. But
it would imply a contradiction if, on the one hand, we maintained that
all ideas had their origin in the world of sensation, and, on the other,
that a word was more than a word; that besides the beings known to us by
our senses, beings which are one and all individuals, there existed also
beings of a general, not individual, nature. An _unbodily substance_ is
the same absurdity as an _unbodily body_. _Body, being_, _substance_,
are but different terms for the same _reality_. It is impossible to
separate thought from matter _that_ thinks. This matter is the
substratum of all changes going on in the world. The word _infinite_ is
_meaningless_, unless it states that our mind is capable of performing
an endless process of addition. Only material things being perceptible,
knowable to us, we cannot know _anything_ about the existence of God. My
own existence alone is certain. Every human passion is a mechanical
movement which has a beginning and an end. The objects of impulse are
what we call good. Man is subject to the same laws as nature. Power and
freedom are identical.

Hobbes had systematised Bacon without, however, furnishing a proof for
Bacon’s fundamental principle, the origin of all human knowledge and
ideas from the world of sensation.

It was _Locke_ who, in his _Essay on the Humane Understanding_, supplied
this proof.

Hobbes had shattered the _theistic_ prejudices of Baconian materialism;
Collins, Dodwell, Coward, Hartley, Priestley, similarly shattered the
last theological bars that still hemmed in Locke’s sensationalism. At
all events, for materialists, deism is but an easy-going way of getting
rid of religion.

We have already mentioned how opportune Locke’s work was for the French.
Locke founded the philosophy of _bon sens_, of common sense; i.e., he
said indirectly that there cannot be any philosophy at variance with the
healthy human senses and reason based on them.

Locke’s _immediate_ pupil, _Condillac_, who translated him into
_French_, at once applied Locke’s sensualism against seventeenth-century
_metaphysics_. He proved that the French had rightly rejected this
metaphysics as a mere botch work of fancy and theological prejudice. He
published a refutation of the systems of _Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz_
and _Malebranche_.

In his _Essai sur l'origine des connaissances humaines_ he expounded
Locke’s ideas and proved that not only the soul, but the senses too, not
only the art of creating ideas, but also the art of sensuous perception,
are matters of _experience_ and _habit_. The whole development of man
therefore depends on _education_ and _external circumstances_. It was
only by _eclectic_ philosophy that Condillac was ousted from the French
schools.

The difference between _French_ and _English_ materialism reflects the
difference between the two nations. The French imparted to English
materialism wit, flesh and blood, and eloquence. They gave it the
temperament and grace that it lacked. They _civilised_ it.

In _Helvétius_, who also based himself on Locke, materialism assumed a
really French character. Helvétius conceived it immediately in its
application to social life (Helvétius, _De 1'homme_).^([53]) The sensory
qualities and self-love, enjoyment and correctly understood personal
interest are the basis of all morality. The natural equality of human
intelligences, the unity of progress of reason and progress of industry,
the natural goodness of man, and the omnipotence of education, are the
main features in his system.

In _La Mettrie’s_ works we find a synthesis of Cartesian and English
materialism. He makes use of Descartes’ physics in detail. His _L'homme
machine_ is a treatise after the model of Descartes’ animal-machine. The
physical part of Holbach’s _Système de la nature_ is also a result of
the combination of French and English materialism, while the moral part
is based essentially on the morality of Helvétius.^([54]) _Robinet_ (_De
la nature_), the French materialist who had the most connection with
metaphysics and was therefore praised by Hegel, refers explicitly to
_Leibniz_.

We need not dwell on Volney, Dupuis, Diderot and others, any more than
on the physiocrats, after we have proved the dual origin of French
materialism from Descartes’ physics and English materialism, and the
opposition of French materialism to seventeenth-century _metaphysics_,
to the metaphysics of Descartes, Spinoza, Malebranche, and Leibniz. This
opposition only became evident to the Germans after they themselves had
come into opposition to _speculative metaphysics._

Just as _Cartesian_ materialism passes into _natural science proper_,
the other trend of French materialism leads directly to _socialism_ and
_communism_.

There is no need for any great penetration to see from the teaching of
materialism on the original goodness and equal intellectual endowment of
men, the omnipotence of experience, habit and education, and the
influence of environment on man, the great significance of industry, the
justification of enjoyment, etc., how necessarily materialism is
connected with communism and socialism. If man draws all his knowledge,
sensation, etc., from the world of the senses and the experience gained
in it, then what has to be done is to arrange the empirical world in
such a way that man experiences and becomes accustomed to what is truly
human in it and that he becomes aware of himself as man. If correctly
understood interest is the principle of all morality, man’s private
interest must be made to coincide with the interest of humanity. If man
is unfree in the materialistic sense, i.e., is free not through the
negative power to avoid this or that, but through the positive power to
assert his true individuality, crime must not be punished in the
individual, but the anti-social sources of crime must be destroyed, and
each man must be given social scope for the vital manifestation of his
being. If man is shaped by environment, his environment must be made
human. If man is social by nature, he will develop his true nature only
in society, and the power of his nature must be measured not by the
power of the separate individual but by the power of society. These and
similar propositions are to be found almost literally even in the oldest
French materialists. This is not the place to assess them. The apologia
of vices by Mandeville, one of Locke’s early English followers, is
typical of the socialist tendencies of materialism. He proves that in
_modern_ society vice is _indispensable_ and _useful_. [Bernard de.
Mandeville, _The Fable of the Bees: or, Private Vices, Publick
Benefits_] This was by no means an apologia for modern society.

_Fourier_ proceeds directly from the teaching of the French
materialists. The _Babouvists_ were crude, uncivilised materialists, but
developed communism, too, derives _directly_ from _French materialism_.
The latter returned to its mother-country, _England_, in the form
_Helvétius_ gave it. _Bentham_ based his system of _correctly understood
interest_ on Helvétius’ morality, and _Owen_ proceeded from _Bentham’s_
system to found English communism. Exiled to England, the Frenchman
_Cabet_ came under the influence of communist ideas there and on his
return to France became the most popular, if the most superficial,
representative of communism. Like Owen, the more scientific French
Communists, _Dézamy_, _Gay_ and others, developed the teaching of
_materialism_ as the teaching of _real humanism_ and the _logical_ basis
of _communism_.

Where, then, did Herr Bauer or, _Criticism_, manage to acquire the
documents for the Critical history of French materialism?

1) Hegel’s [_Vorlesungen über die_] _Geschichte der Philosophie_
presents French materialism as the _realisation_ of the Substance of
Spinoza, which at any rate is far more comprehensible than “the French
school of Spinoza’.

2) Herr _Bauer_ read Hegel’s _Geschichte dear Philosophie_ as saying
that French materialism was the _school_ of Spinoza. Then, as he found
in another of Hegel’s works that deism and materialism are _two parties_
representing _one and the same_ basic principle, he concluded that
Spinoza had _two_ schools which disputed over the meaning of his system.
Herr Bauer could have found the supposed explanation in Hegel’s
_Phänomenologie_, where it is said:

“Regarding that Absolute Being, _Enlightenment_ itself fails out with
itself ... and is divided between the views of _two parties_.... The one
... calls _Absolute Being_ that predicateless Absolute ... the other
calls it _matter_ .... Both are entirely the _same_ notion — the
distinction lies not in the objective fact, but purely in the diversity
of starting-point adopted by the two developments” (Hegel,
_Phänomenologie_, pp. 420, 421, 422)

3) Finally Herr Bauer could find, again in Hegel, that when Substance
does not develop into a concept and self-consciousness, it degenerates
into “romanticism”. The journal _Hallische Jahrbücher_ at one time
developed a similar theory.

But at all costs _the_ “_Spirit_” had to decree a “_foolish destiny_”
for its “_adversary_”, _materialism_.

_Note_. French materialism’s connection with Descartes and Locke and the
opposition of eighteenth-century philosophy to seventeenth-century
metaphysics are presented in detail in most recent _French_ histories of
philosophy. In this respect, we had only to repeat against Critical
Criticism what was already known. But the connection of
eighteenth-century materialism with English and French _communism_ of
the nineteenth century still needs to be presented in detail. We confine
ourselves here to quoting a few typical passages from Helvétius, Holbach
and Bentham.

1) _Helvétius_. “Man is not wicked, but he is subordinate to his
interests. One must not therefore complain of the wickedness of man but
of the ignorance of the legislators, who have always placed the
particular interest in opposition to the general interest.” — “The
moralists have so far had no success because we have to dig into
legislation to pull out the roots which create vice. In New Orleans
women have the right to repudiate their husbands as soon as they are
tired of them. In countries like that women are not faithless, because
they have no interest in being so.” — “Morality is but a frivolous
science when not combined with politics and legislation The hypocritical
moralists can be recognised on the one hand by the equanimity with which
they consider vices which undermine the state, and on the other by the
fury with which they condemn private vice” — “Human beings are born
neither good nor bad but ready to become one or the other according as a
common interest unites or divides them.” — “If citizens could not
achieve their own particular good without achieving the general good,
there would be no vicious people except fools” _(De l'esprit._ 1, Paris,
1822,^([55]) pp. 117, 240, 241, 249, 251, 369 and 339).

As, according to Helvétius, it is education, by which he means (cf. loc.
cit., p. 390) not only education in the ordinary sense but the totality
of the individual’s conditions of life, which forms man, if a reform is
necessary to abolish the contradiction between particular interests and
those of society, so, on the other hand, a transformation of
consciousness is necessary to carry out such a reform:

“Great reforms can he implemented only by weakening the stupid respect
of peoples for old laws and customs” (loc. cit., p. 260)

or, as he says elsewhere, by abolishing ignorance.

2) _Holbach. “_Man can only love himself in the objects he loves: he can
have affection only for himself in the other beings of his-kind.” “Man
can never separate himself from himself for a single instant in his
life, he cannot lose sight of himself.” ‘It is always our convenience,
our interest ... that makes us hate or love things.” _(Système social,_
t. 1, Paris, 1822,56 pp. 80, 112), but “In his own interest man must
love other men, because they are necessary to welfare.... Morality
proves to him that of all beings the most necessary to man is man.” (p.
76). “True morality, and true politics as well, is that which seeks to
bring men nearer to one another to make them work by united efforts for
their common happiness. Any morality which separates our interests from
_those of_ our associates, is false, senseless, unnatural.” (p. 116).
“To love others ... is to merge our interests with _those of_ our
associates, to work for the common benefit.... Virtue is but the
usefulness of men united in _society_”. (p. 77). “A man without desires
or passions would cease to be a man.... Perfectly detached from himself,
how could one make him decide to attach himself to others? A man
indifferent to everything and having no passions, sufficient to himself,
would cease to he a social being.... Virtue is but the communication of
good.” (loc. cit., p. 118). “ Religious morality never served to make
mortals more sociable.” (loc. cit., p. 36).

3) _Bentham_. We only quote one passage from Bentham in which he opposes
“_intérêt général_ in the political sense” “The interest of individuals
... must give way to the public interest. But ... what does that mean?
Is not each individual part of the public as much as any other? This
public interest that you personify is but an abstract term: it
represents but the mass of individual interests.... If it were good to
sacrifice the fortune of one individual to increase that of others, it
would be better to sacrifice that of a second, a third, and so on ad
infinitum.... Individual interests are the only real interests.”
(Bentham, _Théorie des peines et des récompenses_, Paris, 1826, 3ème
6d., II, p. [229], 230).



E) FINAL DEFEAT OF SOCIALISM


“The French set up a series of _systems_ of _how_ the _mass_ should be
_organised_, but they had to resort to _fantasy_ because they considered
the mass, as it is, to be usable material.”

Actually, the French and the English have proved, and proved in great
detail, that the present social system organises the “mass _as it is_”
and is therefore its _organisation_. _Criticism_, following the example
of the _Allgemeine Zeitung_, disposes of all socialist and communist
systems by means of the _fundamental_ word “_fantasy_”. ^([57]) Having
thus shattered foreign socialism and communism, _Criticism_ transfers
its war-like operations to Germany.

“When the _German Enlighteners_ suddenly found themselves disappointed
in their hopes of 1842 and, in their embarrassment, did not know _what
to do, news_ of the recent _French_ systems came in the nick of time.
They were henceforth able to speak of raising the lower classes of the
people and at that price they were able to dispense with the question
whether they did not themselves belong to the mass, which is to be found
not only in the lowest strata.”

_Criticism_ has obviously so exhausted its entire provision of well
meaning motives in the apologia for Bauer’s literary past that it can
find no other explanation for the German socialist movement than the
“embarrassment” of the Enlighteners in 1842. “Fortunately they received
news of the recent _French_ systems.” Why not of the _English_? For the
decisive _Critical_ reason that Herr Bauer received no news of the
recent English systems through Stein’s book: _Der Communismus und
Socialismus des heutigen Frankreichs_. This is also the decisive reason
why only _French systems_ ever exist for _Criticism_ in all its talk
about socialist systems.

The German Enlighteners, Criticism goes on to explain, committed a sin
against the Holy Ghost. They busied themselves with the “lower classes
of the people”, already in existence in 1842, in order to get rid of the
question, which did not yet exist then, as to what rank they were
destined to occupy in the _Critical world system_ that was to be
instituted in anno 1843: sheep or goat, Critical Critic or impure Mass,
_Spirit_ or _Matter_. But above all they should have thought seriously
of the Critical _salvation of their own souls_, for of what profit is it
to me if I gain the whole world, including the lower classes of the
people, and suffer the loss of my own soul?

“But a spiritual being cannot be raised to a higher level unless it is
altered, and it cannot be altered before it has experienced extreme
resistance.”

Were _Criticism_ better acquainted with the movement of the lower
classes of the people it would know that the extreme resistance that
they have experienced from practical life is changing them every day.
Modern prose and poetry emanating in England and France from the lower
classes of the people would show it that the lower classes of the people
know how to raise themselves spiritually even without being directly
_overshadowed_ by the _Holy Ghost of Critical Criticism_.

“They,” Absolute Criticism continues to indulge in fancy, “whose _whole
wealth_ is the word ‘_organisation of the mass'_”, etc.

A lot has been said about “organisation of labour”, although even this
“catchword” came not from the Socialists themselves but from the
politically radical party in France, which tried to be an intermediary
between politics and socialism.^([58]) But nobody before Critical
Criticism spoke of “organisation of the mass” as of a question yet to be
solved. It was proved, on the contrary, that _bourgeois society,_ the
dissolution of the old _feudal_ society, is this organisation of the
mass.

_Criticism_ puts its discovery in quotation marks [Gänsefüsse
(=goose-feet) is a German word for quotation marks]. The goose that
cackled to Herr Bauer the watchword for saving the Capitol^([59]) is
none but his _own_ _goose, Critical Criticism_. It organised the mass
anew by speculatively constructing it as _the_ Absolute Opponent of
_the_ Spirit. The antithesis between spirit and mass is the Critical
“organisation of society”, in which _the_ Spirit, or _Criticism_,
represents the organising _work_, the mass — the _raw material_, and
history — the _product_.

After Absolute Criticism’s great victories over revolution, materialism
and socialism in its third campaign, we may ask: What is the _final
result_ of these Herculean feats? Only that these movements _perished_
without any result because they were still _criticism adulterated by
mass_ or _spirit adulterated by matter_. Even in Herr Bauer’s own
literary past _Criticism_ discovered manifold adulterations of criticism
by the mass. But _here_ it writes an apologia instead of a criticism,
“_places in safety_” instead of _surrendering_; instead of seeing in the
_adulteration of the spirit_ by the _flesh_ the death of the spirit too,
it reverses the case and finds in the adulteration of the _flesh by the
spirit_ the life even of _Bauer’s_ flesh. On the other hand, it is all
the more ruthless and decisively _terroristic_ as soon as imperfect
criticism still adulterated by mass is no longer the _work_ of Herr
Bauer but of whole peoples and of a number of ordinary Frenchmen and
Englishmen; as soon as imperfect criticism is no longer entitled _Die
Judenfrage_, or _Die gute Sache der Freiheit, or Staat, Religion und
Parthei_, but revolution, materialism, socialism or communism. Thus
_Criticism_ did away with the adulteration of spirit by matter and of
criticism by mass by sparing its own flesh and crucifying the flesh of
others.

One way or the other, the “spirit adulterated by flesh” or “Criticism
adulterated by mass” has been cleared out of the way. Instead of this
un-Critical adulteration, there appears absolutely Critical
_disintegration_ of spirit and flesh, criticism and mass, their pure
opposition. This opposition in its _world-historic_ form in which it
constitutes the true historical interest of the present time, is the
opposition of Herr Bauer and Co., or _the_ Spirit, to the rest of the
human race as Matter.

Revolution, materialism and communism _therefore_ have fulfilled their
historic mission. By their _downfall_ they have prepared the way for the
Critical _Lord_. Hosanna!

f) The Speculative Cycle of Absolute Criticism and the Philosophy of Self-Consciousness

_Criticism_, having supposedly attained _perfection_ and purity in _one_
domain, _therefore_ committed only one _oversight_ “only” one
“inconsistency”, that of not being “pure” and “perfect” in all domains.
The “one” Critical domain is none other than that of _theology._ The
_pure_ area of this domain extends from the _Kritik der Synoptiker_ by
Bruno Bauer to _Das entdeckte Christenthum_ by Bruno Bauer, as the
farthest frontier post.

“Modern Criticism,” we are told, “had finally dealt with Spinozism; it
was therefore inconsistent of it naively to presuppose Substance in one
domain, even if only in individual, falsely expounded points.”

_Criticism’s_ earlier admission that it had been involved in political
prejudice was immediately followed by the extenuating circumstance that
this involvement had been “_basically so slight_!” Now “the admission of
_inconsistency_ is tempered by the parenthesis that it committed only in
_individual, falsely expounded points_. It was not Herr Bauer who was to
blame, but the _false points_ which _ran away_ _with Criticism_ like
recalcitrant mounts.

A few quotations will show that by overcoming _Spinozism Criticism_
ended up in _Hegelian idealism_, that from “_Substance_” it arrive d at
another _metaphysical monster, the “Subject_”, _“Substance as a_
_process_”, _“infinite self-consciousness_”, and that the final result
of “perfect” and “pure” Criticism is the _restoration of the Christian
theory of creation_ in a _speculative, Hegelian_ form.

Let us first open the _Kritik der Synoptiker_.

“Strauss remains true to the view that Substance is the Absolute.
Tradition in this form of universality, which has not yet attained the
real and rational certitude of universality, that certitude which can be
attained only in self-consciousness, in the o~ and infinity of
self-consciousness, is nothing but Substance which has emerged from its
logical simplicity and has assumed a definite form of existence as the
_power of the community_.” (_Kritik der Synoptiker_, Vol. I, Preface,
pp. vi [-vii]).

Let us leave to their fate “_the_ universality which attains certitude”,
the “oneness and infinity” (the Hegelian _Notion_). — Instead of saying
that the view put forward in _Strauss’_ theory on the “power of the
community” and “tradition” has its abstract expression, its logical and
metaphysical _hieroglyphic_, in the Spinozist conception of _Substance_,
Herr Bauer makes “_Substance emerge_ from its _logical simplicity_ and
assume a definite form of existence in the power of the community”. He
applies the _Hegelian_ miracle apparatus by which the “_metaphysical
categories_” — abstractions extracted out of _reality_ — emerge from
_logic_, where they are dissolved in the “_simplicity_” of thought, and
assume “a definite form” of physical or human existence; he makes them
become incarnate. Help, _Hinrichs_!

“Mysterious,” _Criticism_ continues its argument against Strauss,
“mysterious is this view because whenever it wishes to explain and make
visible the process to which the gospel history owes its origin, it can
only bring out the _semblance_ of a press [... ] The sentence: ‘The
gospel history has its source and origin in tradition’, posits the same
thing _twice_ — ‘tradition’ and the ‘gospel history'; admittedly it does
posit a relation between them, but it does not tell us to what _internal
process of Substance_ the development and exposition owe their origin."'

According to _Hegel, Substance_ must be conceived as an _internal_
_process._ He characterises _development_ from the viewpoint of
Substance as follows:

“But if we look more closely at this _expansion_, we find that it has
not come about by one and the same principle taking shape in diverse
ways; it is only the shapeless _repetition of one and the same thing_
... keeping up a tedious _semblance_ of diversity” (_Phänomenologie_,
Preface, p. 12).

Help, Hinrichs!

“Criticism,” Herr Bauer continues, “according to this, must turn against
itself and look for the solution of the _mysterious substantiality_ ...
in what the _development of Substance itself_ leads to, in the
universality and certitude of the idea and its real existence, in
_infinite self-consciousness._”

_Hegel’s_ criticism of the substantiality view continues:

“The compact solidity of Substance is to be opened up and Substance
raised to _self-consciousness_” (loc. cit., p. 7).

Bauer’s _self-consciousness,_ too, is _Substance raised_ to
self-consciousness or _self-consciousness_ as _Substance_;
self-consciousness is transformed from an _attribute of man_ into a
_self-existing subject._ This is the _metaphysical-theological_
caricature of man in his _severance_ from nature. The _being_ of this
self-consciousness is therefore not _man_, but _the idea_ of which
self-consciousness is the _real existence_. It is the idea _become man_,
and therefore it is _infinite_. All _human_ qualities are thus
transformed in a _mysterious way_ into qualities of imaginary “_infinite
self-consciousness_”. Hence, Herr Bauer says _expressly_ that
_everything_ has its _origin_ and its _explanation_ in this “infinite
selfconsciousness”, i.e., finds in it the _basis_ of its _existence_.
Help, _Hinrichs_!

Herr Bauer continues:

“The power of the _substantiality relation_ lies in its impulse, which
leads us to the concept, the idea and self-consciousness.”

_Hegel_. says:

“Thus the _concept_ is the _truth_ of the substance.” “The transition of
the _substantiality relation_ takes place through its own immanent
necessity and consists in this only, that _the_ concept is the truth of
the substance.” “The _idea_ is the adequate concept.” “The concept ...
having achieved _free_ existence ... is nothing but the _ego_ or _pure
self-consciousness_” (_Logik_, Hegel’s Werke, 2nd ed., Vol. 5, pp. 6, 9,
229, 13).

Help, _Hinrichs_!

It seems comic in the extreme when Herr Bauer says in his
_Literatur-Zeitung_:

“_Strauss_ came to grief because he was unable to _complete the
criticism of Hegel’s system_, although he proved by his half-way
criticism the necessity for its completion”, etc. ^([60])

It was not a _complete criticism_ of Hegel’s system that Herr Bauer
himself thought he was giving in his _Kritik der Synoptiker_ but at the
most the _completion of Hegel’s system_, at least in its application to
theology.

He describes his criticism (_Kritik der Synoptiker_, Preface, p. xxi) as
“the last act of a definite system”, which is no other than _Hegel’s_
system.

The dispute between _Strauss_ and _Bauer_ over _Substance_ and
_Self-Consciousness_ is a dispute _within Hegelian_ speculation. In
_Hegel_ there are _three_ elements, _Spinoza’s Substance_, _Fichte’s
Self-Consciousness_ _and_ Hegel’s necessarily antagonistic _unity_ of
the two, the _Absolute Spirit_. The first element is metaphysically
disguised _nature separated_ from man; the second is metaphysically
disguised _spirit separated_ from nature; the third is the
metaphysically disguised _unity_ of both, _real man_ and the real
_human_ _species._

Within the domain of theology, _Strauss_ expounds _Hegel_ from
_Spinoza’s point of view,_ and Bauer does so from _Fichte’s point of
view_, both quite consistently. They both _criticised_ Hegel insofar as
with him each of the two elements was _falsified_ by the other, whereas
they carried each of these elements to its _one-sided_ and hence
consistent development. — Both of them therefore go _beyond_ Hegel in
their criticism, but both also remain _within_ his speculation and each
represents only _one_ side of his system. _Feuerbach_, who completed and
criticised _Hegel from Hegel’s point of view_ by resolving the
metaphysical _Absolute_ Spirit into “_real man on the basis of nature_”,
was the first to complete the _criticism of religion_ by sketching in a
grand and masterly manner the _basic features_ of the _criticism of
Hegel’s speculation_ and hence of _all_ _metaphysics_.

With Herr Bauer it is, admittedly, no longer the _Holy Ghost,_ but
nevertheless _infinite self-consciousness_ that dictates the writings of
the evangelist.

“We ought not any longer to conceal the fact that the correct conception
of the gospel history also has its _philosophical basis, namely, the
philosophy of self-consciousness_” (Bruno Bauer, _Kritik der
Synoptiker_, Preface, p. xv).

This philosophy of Herr Bauer, the _philosophy of self-consciousness,_
like the _results_ he achieved by his criticism of theology, must be
characterised by a few extracts from _Das entdeckte Christenthum_, his
_last_ work on the philosophy of religion.

Speaking of the _French materialists_, he says:

“When the _truth_ of materialism, the _philosophy_ of
_self-consciousness,_ is revealed and _self-consciousness_ is recognised
as the _Universe_, as the solution of the riddle of _Spinoza’s
substance_ and as the true _causa sui_ [Cause of itself]..., what is the
purpose of _the Spirit_? _What is the purpose of self-consciousness_? As
if _self-consciousness_, by positing the _world_, did not posit
_distinction_ and did not produce itself in all it produces, since it
does away again with _the distinction of what it produced from itself_,
and since, consequently it is itself only in production and in movement
— as if self-consciousness in this movement, which is itself, had not
its purpose and did not possess itself!” (_Das entdeckte Christenthum_,
p. 113.)

“The French materialists did, indeed, conceive the movement of
selfconsciousness as the movement of the universal being, matter, but
they could _not yet_ see that the _movement of the universe_ became
_real_ for itself and achieved unity with itself _only_ as the _movement
of self-consciousness_” (1. c., pp. [114-] 115).

Help, _Hinrichs_!

In plain language the _first_ extract means: the truth of _materialism_
is the _opposite_ of materialism, _absolute_, i.e., exclusive,
unmitigated _idealism_. Self-consciousness, _the Spirit_, is the
_Universe_. Outside of it there is _nothing_. “Self-consciousness”,
“_the Spirit_”, is the almighty creator of the world, of heaven and
earth. The _world_ is a manifestation of the life of self-consciousness
which has to _alienate_ itself and take on _the form of a slave_, but
the difference between the world and self-consciousness is only an
_apparent difference_. Self-consciousness distinguishes _nothing real_
from itself. The world is, rather, only a metaphysical _distinction_, a
phantom of its ethereal brain and an _imaginary_ product of the latter.
Hence selfconsciousness does away again with the appearance, which it
conceded for a moment, that something exists outside of it, and it
recognises in what it has “produced” no real object, i.e., no object
which in reality, is distinct from it. By this movement, however,
_self-consciousness_ first produces itself as absolute, for the
_absolute_ idealist, in order to be an absolute idealist, must
necessarily constantly go through the _sophistical process_ of first
transforming the world _outside himself_ into an appearance, a mere
fancy of _his_ brain, and afterwards declaring this _fantasy_ to be what
it really is, i.e., a mere fantasy, so as finally to be able to proclaim
his sole, exclusive existence, which is no longer disturbed even by the
semblance of an external world.

In plain language the _second_ extract means: The French materialists
did, of course, conceive the movements of matter as movements involving
spirit, but they were not yet able to see that they are not _material_
but _ideal_ movements, movements of selfconsciousness, consequently pure
movements of thought. They were not yet able to see that the real
movement of the universe became true and real only as the _ideal_
movement of selfconsciousness free and freed from _matter_, that is,
from reality; in other words, that a _material_ movement distinct from
ideal brain movement exists only in _appearance_. Help, _Hinrichs_!

This speculative _theory of creation_ is almost word for word in
_Hegel;_ it can be found in his _first_ work, his _Phänomenologie_.

“The alienation _of self-consciousness_ itself establishes
_thinghood_.... In this alienation self-consciousness establishes itself
as object or sets up the object as _itself_. On the other hand, there is
also this other moment in the process that it has just as much
_abolished_ this _alienation_ and _objectification_ and resumed them
into itself.... This is the _movement of consciousness_” (Hegel,
_Phänomenologie_, pp. 574-75).

“Self-consciousness has a _content_ which it distinguishes _from
itself_... This content in its _distinction_ is itself the _ego_, for it
is the _movement_ of superseding itself.... More precisely stated, this
content is nothing but the _very movement just spoken of;_ for the
content is _the Spirit_ which traverses the whole range of its own
being, and does this _for itself_ as _Spirit_” (_loc. cit_., pp. [582-]
583).

Referring to this theory of creation of Hegel’s, _Feuerbach_ observes:

“Matter is the self-alienation of the spirit. Thereby matter itself
acquires spirit and reason — but at the same time it is assumed as a
_nothingness_, an _unreal_ being, inasmuch as being producing itself
from this alienation, i.e., being divesting itself of matter, of
sensuousness, is pronounced to be being in its perfection, in its true
shape and form. Therefore the natural, the material, the sensuous, is
what is to he _negated_ here too, as _nature poisoned by original sin_
is in theology” (_Philosophie der Zukunft_ p. 35).

Herr Bauer therefore defends materialism against _un-Critical theology_,
at the same time as he reproaches it with “not yet” being _Critical
theology, theology of reason, Hegelian speculation_. _Hinrichs!
Hinrichs_!

Herr Bauer, who in all domains carries through _his_ opposition to
_Substance, his philosophy of self-consciousness_ or of _the_ Spirit,
must therefore in all domains have only the _figments_ of his own
_brain_ to deal with. In his hands, _Criticism_ is the instrument to
sublimate into mere _appearance_ and _pure_ thought all that affirms a
_finite_ material existence _outside infinite self-consciousness._ What
he combats in Substance is not the _metaphysical illusion_ but its
_mundane_ kernel — _nature_; nature both as it exists _outside_ man and
as man’s nature. Not to presume _Substance_ in any domain — he still
uses this language — means therefore for him not to recognise any
_being_ distinct from thought, any _natural energy_ distinct from the
_spontaneity of the spirit_, any _power of human nature_ distinct from
_reason_, any _passivity_ distinct from _activity_, any _influence of
others_ distinct from _one’s own action_ any _feeling_ or _willing_
distinct from _knowing_, any _heart_ distinct from the _head_, any
_object_ distinct from the _subject_, any _practice_ distinct from
_theory_, any _man_ distinct from the _Critic_, any _real community_
distinct from _abstract generality_, any _Thou_ distinct from _I_. Herr
Bauer is therefore consistent when he goes on to identify _himself_ with
_infinite_ _self-consciousness,_ with the _Spirit_, i.e., to replace
these creations of his by their creator. He is just as consistent in
rejecting as _stubborn mass_ and _matter_ the _rest of the_ _world_
which obstinately insists on being something _distinct_ from what _he_,
Herr Bauer, has produced. And so he hopes:

It will not belong
Before all bodies perish.'
[Goethe, Faust, Part 1, Scene 3]

His own ill-humour at so far being unable to master “the _something_ of
this _clumsy world_” he interprets equally consistently as the
_self-discontent_ of this world, and the indignation of his Criticism at
the development of mankind as the _mass-type_ indignation of mankind
against _his_ Criticism, against the Spirit, against Herr Bruno Bauer
and Co.

Herr Bauer was a _theologian_ from the very beginning, but no ordinary
one; he was a _Critical theologian_ or a _theological Critic_. While
still the extreme representative of _old Hegelian_ orthodoxy who put in
a speculative form all _religious_ and _theological nonsense_, he
constantly proclaimed _Criticism_ his _private domain_. At that time he
called _Strauss’_ criticism _human_ criticism and expressly asserted the
right of divine criticism in opposition to it. He later stripped the
great _self-reliance_ or _self-consciousness,_ which was the hidden
kernel of this divinity, of its religious shell, made it self-existing
as an independent being, and raised it, under the trade-mark “_Infinite
Self-consciousness_”, to the rank of the principle of Criticism. Then he
accomplished in his own movement the movement that the “philosophy of
self-consciousness” describes as the absolute act of life. He abolished
anew the “distinction” between “the product”, _infinite_
_self-consciousness,_ and the producer, _himself_, and acknowledged that
infinite self-consciousness in its movement “_was only he himself_”, and
that therefore the movement of the universe only becomes _true_ and
_real_ in his ideal self-movement.

_Divine_ criticism in its _return into itself_ is restored in a
rational, conscious, Critical way; _being in-itself_ is transformed into
_being in-and-for-itself_ and only at the _end_ does the fulfilled,
realised, revealed _beginning_ take place. _Divine_ criticism, as
_distinct_ from _human_ criticism, reveals itself as _Criticism, pure
Criticism, Critical Criticism_. The apologia for the Old and the New
Testament is replaced by the apologia for the old and new works of Herr
Bauer. The _theological_ antithesis of God and man, spirit and flesh,
infinity and finiteness is transformed into the _Critical-theological_
antithesis _of the Spirit, Criticism_, or Herr _Bauer_, and the _matter_
of the _mass_, or the secular world. The theological antithesis of faith
and reason has been resolved into the Critical-theological antithesis of
_common sense_ and pure Critical thought. The _Zeitschrift für
spekulative Theologie_ has been transformed into the Critical
_Literatur-Zeitung_. _The religious redeemer of the world_ has finally
become a reality in the _Critical redeemer of the world_, Herr _Bauer_.

Herr Bauer’s last stage is not an anomaly in his development; it is the
_return_ of his development _into_ itself from its _alienation_.
Naturally, the point at which _divine_ Criticism _alienated_ itself and
came out of itself coincided with the point at which it became partly
untrue to itself and created something _human_.

Returning to its starting-point, _Absolute Criticism_ has ended the
_speculative cycle_ and thereby its own _life’s career_. Its further
movement is _pure_, lofty _circling within itself_, above all interest
of a mass nature and therefore devoid of any further interest for the
Mass.



CHAPTER VII CRITICAL CRITICISM’S CORRESPONDENCE


1) The Critical Mass

Où peut-on être mieux
Qu'au sein de sa famine?
[Where can one feel better
Than in the bosom of one’s family?
From J. F. Marmontel’s one-act comedy Lucile.]

In its _Absolute_ existence as Herr _Bruno_, Critical Criticism has
declared the _mass_ of mankind, the whole of mankind that is not
Critical Criticism, to be its _opposite_, its _essential object;
essential,_ because the Mass exists _ad majorem gloriam dei_ [For the
greater glory of God], the glory of _Criticism_, of _the_ Spirit; _its
object,_ because it is only the _matter_ on which Critical Criticism
operates. Critical Criticism has proclaimed its relationship to the Mass
as the _world-historic relationship_ of the present time.

No _world-historic opposition_ is formed, however, by the statement that
one is in opposition to the whole world. One can imagine that one is a
stumbling-block for the world because one is clumsy enough to stumble
everywhere. But for a world-historic opposition it is not enough for me
to declare the world _my_ opposite; the _world_ for its part must
declare me to be its essential opposite, and must treat and _recognise_
me as such. Critical Criticism ensures itself this recognition by its
_correspondence_, which is called upon to _bear witness_ before the
world to Criticism’s function of redeemer and equally to the general
_irritation_ of the world at the Critical gospel. Critical Criticism is
its own object as the _object of the_ world. The correspondence is
intended to _show it as such,_ as the _world interest_ of the present
time.

Critical Criticism is in its own eyes the _Absolute Subject_. The
Absolute Subject requires a cult. A real cult requires other believing
individuals. The _Holy Family of Charlottenburg_ therefore receives from
its correspondents the cult due to it. The correspondents tell it _what
it is_ and what its adversary, the Mass, _is not_.

However, Criticism falls into an inconsistency by thus having its
opinion of itself represented as the opinion of the world and by its
_concept_ being converted into _reality_. _Within Criticism itself_ a
sort of _Mass_ is forming, a Critical Mass whose simple function is
untiringly to echo the stock phrases of Criticism. For consistency’s
sake this inconsistency may be forgiven. Not feeling at home in the
sinful world, Critical Criticism must set up a sinful world in its own
home.

The path of Critical Criticism’s correspondent, a member of the Critical
Mass, is not a rosy one. It is a difficult, thorny path, a Critical
path. Critical Criticism is a spiritualistic lord, pure spontaneity,
actus purus, intolerant of any influence _from without_. The
correspondent can therefore be a _subject_ only _in appearance_, can
only _seem_ to behave _independently_ towards Critical Criticism, can
only _seemingly_ want to communicate something new and of his own to it.
In _reality_ he is Critical Criticism’s own _product_, its perception of
its own voice made for an instant _objective_ and self-existing.

That is why the correspondents do not fail to assert incessantly that
Critical Criticism itself _knows, realises, understands, grasps_, and
_experiences_ what at the same moment is being communicated to it for
_appearance’s sake_.^([61]) Thus _Zerrleder_, for instance, uses the
expressions: “Do you grasp it? You know. You know for the second and
third time. You’ have probably heard enough to be able to see for
yourself.”

So too the Breslau correspondent _Fleischammer_ says: “But the fact,”
etc., “will be as little of a puzzle to you as to me.” Or the Zurich
correspondent _Hirzel_: “You will probably find out for yourself.” The
Critical correspondent has such anxious respect for the absolute
understanding of _Critical Criticism_ that he attributes understanding
to it even where there is absolutely nothing to understand. For example,
_Fleischhammer_ says:

You will _perfectly_ [!] _understand_ [!] me when I tell you that one
can hardly go out without meeting young Catholic priests in their long
black cowls and cloaks.”

Indeed, in their _fear_ the correspondents _hear_ Critical Criticism —
_saying_, _answering_, _exclaiming_, _deriding_!

_Zeerleder_, for example, says: “But — you _say_. Well, then, listen.”
And _Fleischhammer_. “Yes, I hear what _you say_ — I _only_ mean
that...” And _Hirzel_: “Good for you, you _will exclaim_!” And a
Tübingen correspondent: “_Do not laugh_ at me!”

The correspondents, therefore, also express themselves as though they
were communicating _facts_ to Critical Criticism and expect from it the
_spiritual interpretation_; they provide it with _premises_ and leave
the _conclusion_ to it, or they even _apologise_ for repeating things
Criticism has known for a long time.

_Zerrleder_, for example, says:

“Your correspondent can only give a picture, a description of the facts.
The Spirit which animates these things is _certainly_ not unknown to
_you_.” Or again: “Now you will _surely_ draw the _conclusion for
yourself_.”

And _Hirzel_ says:

“_I shall not presume_ to entertain you with the speculative proposition
that every creation arises out of its extreme opposite.”

Sometimes, too, the _experiences_ of the correspondents are merely the
_fulfilment_ and _confirmation_ of Criticism’s _prophecies_.

_Fleischhammer_, for example, says:

“Your _prediction_ has come true.”

And _Zerrleder_:

“Far from being disastrous, the tendencies that I have described to you
as gaining ever greater scope in Switzerland, are very _fortunate_; they
_only confirm_ the _thought you_ have already often expressed,” etc.

Critical Criticism sometimes feels urged to express the condescension
involved by its participation in the correspondence and motivates this
condescension by the fact that the correspondent has successfully
carried out some _task_. Thus Herr Bruno writes to the Tübingen
correspondent:

“It is really inconsistent on my part to answer your letter. — On the
other hand, you have again ... made such an _apt remark_ that I ...
_cannot refuse_ the explanation you request.” ^([62])

Critical Criticism has letters written to it _from the provinces_; not
the provinces in the political sense, which, as we know, do not exist
anywhere in Germany, but from the _Critical provinces_ of which. Berlin
is the capital, _Berlin_, the seat of the Critical patriarchs and of the
Holy Critical Family, whereas the provinces are where the Critical Mass
resides. The _Critical provincials_ dare not engage the attention of the
_supreme Critical authority_ without bows and apologies.

Thus, someone writes anonymously to Herr _Edgar_, who, being a member of
the Holy Family, is also an eminent personage:

“Honourable Sir, I hope you will _excuse_ these lines on the grounds
that young people like to unite in common strivings (there is not more
than two years’ _difference_ in our ages).”

The coeval of Herr Edgar describes _himself_ incidentally as the
_essence of modern philosophy_. Is it not in the nature of things that
_Criticism_ should correspond with _the essence_ of philosophy? If Herr
Edgar’s coeval affirms that he has already lost his _teeth_, that is
only an allusion to his _allegorical_ essence. This “essence of modern
philosophy” has “learned from _Feuerbach_ to set the factor of education
in objective view”. It at once gives a sample of its _education_ and
_views_ by assuring Herr Edgar that it has acquired a “_complete view_
of his short story”, “_Es leben feste Grundsätze_!” [Long Live firm
principles!” A. Weill und E. Bauer, Berliner Novellen] At the same time
it openly admits that Herr Edgar’s point of view is by no means quite
clear to it, and finally invalidates the assurance concerning the
complete view by the question: “Or have I _completely misunderstood_
you?” After this sample it will be found quite normal that the essence
of modern philosophy, referring to the Mass, should say:

“We must at least once _condescend_ to examine and untie the magic knot
which bars _common human reason_ from access to the _unrestricted_
_flood of thought._”

In order to get a complete view of the Critical Mass one should read the
_correspondence_ of Herr _Hirzel_ from Zurich (Heft V). This unfortunate
man memorises the stock phrases of Criticism with really touching
docility and praiseworthy power of recall, not omitting Herr Bruno’s
favourite phrases about the battles he has waged and the campaigns he
has planned and led. But Herr _Hirzel_ exercises his profession as a
member of the Critical Mass especially by raging against. the _profane
Mass_ and its attitude to _Critical Criticism_.

He speaks of the Mass claiming a part in history, “of the pure Mass”, of
“pure Criticism”, of the “purity of this contradiction” — “a
contradiction purer than any that history has provided” — of the
“_discontented being_”, of the “perfect emptiness, ill humour,
dejection, heartlessness, timidity, fury and bitterness of the Mass
towards Criticism”; of “the Mass which only exists in order by its
resistance to make Criticism sharper and more vigilant”. He speaks of
“creation from the extreme opposite”, of how Criticism is above _hate_
and similar profane sentiments. The whole of Herr _Hirzel’s_
contribution to the _Literatur-Zeitung_ is confined to this profusion of
Critical stock phrases. While reproaching the Mass for being satisfied
with mere “disposition”, “good will”, “the phrase”, “faith”, etc., he
himself, as a member of the _Critical_ _Mass,_ a content with phrases,
expressions of his “Critical disposition”, his “Critical faith”, his
“Critical good will” and leaves “action, work, struggle” and “works” to
Herr Bruno and Co.

Despite the terrible picture of the world-historic tension between the
profane world and “Critical Criticism” which the members of the
“Critical Mass” outline, for the non-believer at least not even the fact
of the matter is stated, the factual existence of this _world-historic_
tension. The obliging and un-Critical repetition of Criticism’s
“imaginations” and “pretensions” by the correspondents only proves that
the fixed ideas of the master are the fixed ideas of the servant as
well. It is true that one of the Critical correspondents [The reference
is to the author of an anonymous report published in the Allgemeine
Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VI, May 1844, in the section “Correspondenz aus
der Provinz"] makes an attempt at a proof based on _fact_.

“You see,” he writes to the Holy Family, “that the _Literatur-Zeitung_
is fulfilling its purpose, ie., that it meets with _no approval_. It
could meet with approval only if it sounded in unison with the general
thoughtlessness, if you strode proudly before it with the jingling of
hackneyed phrases of a whole janissary band of current categories.”

The jingling of hackneyed phrases of a whole janissary band of current
categories It is evident that the Critical correspondent does his best
to keep pace with non-"current” hackneyed phrases. But his explanation
of the fact that the _Literatur-Zeitung_ meets with no approval must he
rejected as purely _apologetic_. This fact could be better explained in
just the opposite way by saying that Critical Criticism is in _unison_
with the great mass, to be precise, the great _mass_ of scribblers who
meet with no approval.

It is therefore not enough for the _Critical_ correspondent to address
Critical hackneyed phrases to the Holy Family as “prayers” and at the
same time to the Mass as “anathemas”. _Un-Critical, mass-type_
correspondents, _real_ delegates of the _Mass_ to Critical Criticism,
are needed to show the real tension between the Mass and Criticism.

That is why Critical Criticism also assigns a place to the _un-Critical
Mass_. It makes unbiased _representatives_ of the latter _correspond_
with it, acknowledge the opposition to itself, Criticism, as important
and absolute, and utter a _fearful cry_ for redemption from this
opposition.

2) The “Un-Critical Mass” and “Critical Criticism”

a) The “Obdurate Mass” and the “Unsatisfied Mass”

The hardness of heart, the obduracy and blind unbelief of “the Mass” has
one rather determined representative. This representative speaks of the
exclusively “Hegelian philosophical education of the Berlin Couleur”
^([63])

“The only true progress that we can make,” he says, “lies in the
acknowledgment of reality. But we learn from you that our knowledge was
not knowledge of reality but of something unreal.”

He calls “natural science” the basis of philosophy.

“A good naturalist stands in the same relation to the philosopher as.
the philosopher to the theologian.”

Further he comments as follows on the “Berlin Couleur”.

“I do not think it would be exaggerating to try to explain the state of
these people by saying that, although they have gone through a process
of spiritual mouking, they have not yet altogether got rid of their old
skin in order to be able to absorb the elements of renovation and
rejuvenation.” “We must yet assimilate this” (natural-scientific and
industrial) “knowledge”. “The knowledge of the world and of man, which
we need most of all, cannot be acquired only by acuity of thought; all
the senses must collaborate and all the aptitudes of man must be applied
as indispensable instruments; otherwise contemplation and knowledge will
always remain defective — and will lead to _moral death_.”

This correspondent, however, sweetens the pill that he hands out to
Critical Criticism. He “makes _Bauer’s words_ find their correct
application”, he has “followed _Bauer’s thoughts_”, he agrees that
“_Bauer has spoken_ the truth” and in the end he seems to polemise, not
against _Criticism_ itself, but against a “Berlin Couleur” which is
distinct from it.

Critical Criticism, feeling itself hit and, moreover, being as sensitive
as an old maid in all _matters of faith_, is not taken in by these
distinctions and this semi-homage.

“You are _mistaken_,” it answers, “if you have taken the party you
described at the beginning of your letter for _your opponent_. Rather
_admit_” (and now comes the crushing sentence of excommunication) “that
_you are an opponent of Criticism itself!_”

The miserable wretch! The man of the Mass! An opponent of _Criticism
itself_! But as far as the content of that _mass-type_ polemic is
concerned, Critical Criticism declares its respect for its critical
attitude to _natural science_ and _industry_”.

“_All respect for natural science! All respect_ for James Watt and” (a
really noble turn!) “no respect at all for the millions that he made for
his relatives.”

All respect for the respect of Critical Criticism! In the same letter in
which Critical Criticism reproaches the above-mentioned _Berlin Couleur_
with too easily disposing of thorough and solid works without studying
them and having _finished_ with a work when they have merely remarked
that it is epoch-making, etc. — in that same letter _Criticism_ _itself
disposes_ of the whole of natural science and _industry_ by merely
declaring its respect for them. The clause which it appends to its’
declaration of respect for _natural science_ reminds one of the first
fulminations of the deceased knight _Krug_ against natural philosophy.

“Nature is not the only reality _because we eat and drink it in its
individual products_.”

Critical Criticism knows this much about the _individual products_ of
nature that “we _eat and drink_ them”. All respect for the natural
science of Critical Criticism!

Criticism is consistent in countering the embarrassingly importunate
demand to study “nature” and “industry” with the following indisputably
witty rhetorical exclamation:

“Or” (!) “do you think that the knowledge of _historical_ reality is
_already complete_? Or” (!) “do you know of any single period in history
which is already _actually_ known?”

Or does Critical Criticism believe that it has reached even the
_beginning_ of a knowledge of historical reality so long as it excludes
_from_ the historical movement the theoretical and practical relation of
man to nature, i.e., natural science and industry? Or does it think that
it actually knows any period without knowing, for example, the industry
of that period, the immediate mode of Production of life itself? Of
course, spiritualistic, _theological_ Critical Criticism only knows (at
least it imagines it knows) the main political, literary and theological
acts of history. Just as it separates thinking from the senses, the soul
from the body and itself from the world, it separates history from
natural science and industry and sees the origin of history not in
vulgar _material_ production on the earth but in vaporous clouds in the
heavens.

The representative of the “obdurate” and “hard-hearted” Mass with his
trenchant reproofs and counsels is disposed of as a _mass-type
materialist_. Another correspondent, not so malicious or mass-like, who
places his hopes in Critical Criticism but finds them unsatisfied ‘
fares no better. The representative of the “_unsatisfied_” Mass writes:

“I must, however, admit that the first number of your paper was _by no
means satisfying_. We expected something else.”

The _Critical patriarch_ answers in person:

“I knew beforehand that it would not satisfy expectations, because I
could rather easily imagine those expectations. One is so exhausted that
one wishes to have _everything at once_. Everything? No! If possible
everything and nothing at the same time. An everything that costs no
trouble, an everything that one can absorb without going through any
development, an everything that is contained in a single word.”

In his vexation at the undue demands of the “Mass”, which demands
_something_, indeed everything, from Criticism, which by principle and
disposition “_gives nothing_”, the Critical patriarch relates an
_anecdote_ in the way that old men do. Not long ago a Berlin
_acquaintance_ complained bitterly of the verbosity and profusion of
detail of his works — Herr Bruno is known to make a bulky work out of
the tiniest semblance of a thought. He was consoled with the promise of
being sent the ink necessary for the printing of the book in a small
pellet so that he could easily absorb it. The patriarch explains the
length of his “works” by the bad spreading of the ink, as he explains
the nothingness of his _Literatur-Zeitung_ by the emptiness of the
“profane Mass”, which, in order to be full, wants to swallow everything
and nothing at the same time.

Just as it is difficult to deny the importance of what has so far been
related, it is equally difficult to see a _world-historic contradiction_
in the fact that a mass-type acquaintance of Critical Criticism
considers Criticism empty, while Criticism, for its part, declares him
to be un-Critical; that a second acquaintance does not find that the
_Literatur-Zeitung_ satisfies his expectations, and that a third
acquaintance and friend of the family finds Criticism’s works too bulky.
However, acquaintance No. 2, who entertains expectations, and friend of
the family No. 3, who wishes at least to find out the secrets of
Critical Criticism, constitute the transition to a _more substantial_
and tenser relationship between Criticism and the ‘.un-Critical Mass”.
Cruel as Criticism is to the “hard-hearted” Mass which has only “common
human reason”, we shall find it condescending to the Mass that is pining
for _redemption_ from contradiction. The Mass which approaches Criticism
with a contrite heart, a spirit of repentance and a humble mind will be
rewarded for its honest striving with many a _wise, prophetic and
outspoken_ word.

b) The “Soft-Hearted” Mass “Pining for Redemption”

The representative of the _sentimental, soft-hearted Mass pining for
redemption_ cringes and implores Critical Criticism for a kind word with
effusions of the heart, deep bows and rolling of the eyes, as follows:

“Why am I writing this to you? Why am I justifying myself before you?
Because I _respect_ you and therefore _desire_ your _respect_; because I
owe you deepest _thanks_ for my development and therefore _love_ you.
_My heart_ impels me to justify myself before you ... who have upbraided
me.... _Far be_ it from me to _obtrude_ upon you; judging _by_ _myself_,
I thought you _might_ _be pleased_ to have proof of _sympathy_ from a
man who is still little known to you. I _make no claim whatsoever_ that
you should answer my letter: I wish neither to take up your time, of
which you can make better use, nor to he irksome to you, nor to expose
myself to the mortification of seeing something that I hoped for remain
_unfulfilled_. You _may_ interpret my letter as _sentimentality_,
importunity or vanity” (!) “or whatever you like; you may answer me or
not, I cannot resist the _impulse_ to send it and I only hope that you
will realise the _friendly feeling_ which inspired it” (!!).

Just as from the beginning God has had mercy on the _poor in spirit_,
this mass-like but humble correspondent, too, who whimpers for mercy
from Critical Criticism, has his wish _fulfilled_. Critical Criticism
gives him a kind answer. More than that! It gives him most Profound
explanations on the objects of his curiousity.

“Two years ago,” Critical Criticism teaches, “it was opportune to
remember the Enlightenment of the French in the eighteenth century in
order to be able to make use of those _light troops_, too, at a place in
the battle that was then being waged. The situation is now _quite
different_. Truths now change very quickly. What was then _opportune_ is
now an _oversight_.”

Of course it was only “an _oversight_” then too, but an “_opportune_”
one, when the Absolute Critical All-high itself (cf. _Anekdota_, Book
II, p. 89) called those _light troops_ “_our saints_”, our “_prophets_”,
“_patriarchs_” etc. Who would call _light troops a troop of
“patriarchs"?_ It was an “opportune” oversight when it spoke with
enthusiasm of the self-denial, moral energy and inspiration with which
these _light_ troops “thought, worked — and studied — throughout their
lives for the truth”. It was an “oversight” when, in the preface to _Das
entdeckte Christenthum_, it was stated that these “_light_” troops
seemed invincible and _any one well-informed_ would have wagered that
they would _put the world out of joint_” and that “it seemed beyond
doubt that they would succeed in giving the world a new shape”. _Those
light troops_?

Critical Criticism continues to teach the inquisitive representative of
the “_cordial_ Mass":

“Although it was a new historical merit of the French to attempt to set
up a social theory, they are none _the less_ now exhausted; their new
theory was not yet pure, their social fantasies and their peaceful
democracy are by no means free from the assumptions of the old state of
things.”

Criticism is talking here about _Fourierism_ — if it is talking about
anything — and in particular of the Fourierism of _La Démocratie
pacifique_. But this is far from being the “social theory” of the
French. The French have _social theories,_ but not a social theory; the
diluted Fourierism that _La Démocratie pacifique_ preaches is nothing
but the social doctrine of a section of the philanthropic bourgeoisie.
The people is _communistic_, and, as a matter of fact, split into a
multitude of different groups; the true movement and the elaboration of
these different social shades is not only not _exhausted_, it is really
only _beginning_. But it will not end in pure, i.e., abstract, _theory_
as Critical Criticism would like it to; it will end in a quite
_practical practice_ that will not bother at all about the categorical
categories of Criticism.

“No nation,” Criticism chatters on, “has _so far_ any advantage over
another. If one can succeed in winning some spiritual superiority over
the others, it will be the one which is in a position to criticise
itself and the others and to discover the causes of the universal
decay.”

_Every_ nation has _so far some advantage_ over another. But if the
Critical prophecy is right, no nation will have any advantage over
another, because all the civilised peoples of Europe — the English, the
Germans, the French — now “_criticise_ themselves and others” and “are
in a position to discover the causes of the universal decay”. Finally,
it is high-sounding _tautology_ to say that “criticising”,
“discovering”, i.e., _spiritual_ activities, give a _spiritual
superiority_, and Criticism, which in its infinite self-consciousness
places itself above the nations and expects them to kneel at its feet
and implore it for enlightenment, only shows by this caricatured
Christian-Germanic idealism that it is still up to its neck in the mire
of _German nationalism_.

The criticism of the French and the English is not an abstract,
preternatural personality outside mankind; it is the _real human
activity_ of individuals who are active members of society and who
suffer, feel, think and act as human beings. That is why their criticism
is at the same time practical, their communism a socialism in which they
give practical, concrete measures, and in which they not only think but
even more act, it is the living, real criticism of existing society, the
recognition of the causes of “the decay”.

After Critical Criticism’s explanations for the inquisitive member of
the Mass, it is entitled to say of its _Literatur-Zeitung_:

“Here Criticism that is _pure_, graphic, relevant and adds nothing is
practised.”

Here “_nothing self-existing_ is given”; here _nothing_ at all _is
given_ except _criticism_ _that gives nothing_, that is, criticism which
culminates in extreme non-criticism. _Criticism_ has underlined passages
printed and reaches its full bloom in _excerpts. Wolfgang Menzel_ and
_Bruno Bauer_ stretch a brotherly hand to each other and Critical
Criticism stands where the _philosophy of identity_ stood at the
beginning of this century, when _Schelling_ protested against the
mass-like supposition that he wanted to give something, anything except
_pure, entirely philosophical_ philosophy.^([64])

c) Grace Bestowed on the Mass

The soft-hearted correspondent whose instruction we have just witnessed
stood in a _comfortable_ relationship to Criticism. In his case there
was only an idyllic hint of the tension between the _Mass_ and
_Criticism_. Both sides of the _world-historic_ contradiction behaved
_kindly_ and _politely_, and therefore _exoterically_, to each other.

Critical Criticism, in its _unhealthy_, soul-shattering effect on the
Mass, is seen first in regard to a correspondent who has one foot
already in Criticism and the other still in the profane world. He
represents the “Mass” in its _inner_ struggle with Criticism.

At times it seems to him “that Herr Bruno and his friends do not
understand _mankind_”, that “they are the ones who are really blinded”.
Then he immediately corrects himself:

“Yes, it is _as clear as daylight_ to me that you are right and that
your thoughts are correct; but _excuse_ me, the people is not wrong
_either_.... Oh yes! The people is right.... I cannot deny that you are
right.... I really do not know what it will all lead to: you will say
... well, stay at home.... _Alas!_ I can no longer stand it.... _Alas!_
One might otherwise go _mad_ in the end.... _Kindly_ accept... Believe
me, the knowledge one has acquired sometimes makes one feel as _stupid_
as if a mill-wheel were turning in one’s head.”

Another correspondent, too, writes that he “is _occasionally
disconcerted_”. One can see that _Critical grace_ is about _to be
bestowed_ on this mass-type correspondent. The poor wretch! The sinful
Mass is tugging at him on one side and Critical Criticism on the other.
It is not the knowledge he has acquired that reduces this pupil of
Critical Criticism to a state of stupor; it is the question of _faith_
and _conscience_; Critical Christ or the people, God or the world, Bruno
Bauer and his friends or the profane Mass! But just as bestowal of
_divine_ grace is preceded by extreme wretchedness of the sinner,
Critical grace is preceded by a crushing _stupefaction_. And when it is
at last bestowed, the chosen one loses not stupidity but the
_consciousness of stupidity_.

3) The Un-Critically Critical Mass Or “Criticism” and The “Berlin Couleur”

Critical Criticism has not succeeded in depicting itself as the
_essential opposite,_ and hence at the same time as the _essential
object,_ of the mass of humanity. Apart from the representatives of the
_obdurate_ Mass which reproaches Critical Criticism for its
_objectlessness_ and gives it to understand in the most courteous
possible way that it has not yet gone through the _process_ of its
spiritual “_moult_” and must first of all acquire solid knowledge, there
is the _soft-hearted_ correspondent. He is no _opposite_ at all, but
then the actual reason for his approach to Critical Criticism is a
_purely personal_ one. As we can see a little further on in his letter,
he really only wants to reconcile his devotion to Herr Arnold Ruge with
his devotion to Herr _Bruno Bauer_. This attempt at reconciliation does
credit to his kind heart, but it in no way constitutes an _interest of a
mass nature_. Finally, the last correspondent to appear was no longer a
_real_ member of the Mass, he was only a catechumen of Critical
Criticism.

In general, the _Mass_ is an _indefinite_ object, and therefore can
neither carry out a definite action nor enter into a definite
relationship. _The_ Mass, as the object of Critical Criticism, has
nothing in common with the _real_ masses who, for their part, form among
themselves oppositions of a pronounced mass nature. _Critical
Criticism’s_ mass is “made” by Criticism itself, as would be the case if
a naturalist, instead of speaking of definite classes, contrasted _the_
Class to himself.

Hence, in order to have an opposite of a really mass nature, _Critical
Criticism_ needs, besides this _abstract_ Mass which is the figment of
its own brain, a _definite_ _Mass_ that can be empirically demonstrated
and not just conjured up. This Mass must see in Critical Criticism both
its _essence and the annihilation of its essence. It_ must wish to be
Critical Criticism, non-Mass, without _being_ _able to._ This Critically
un-Critical Mass is the above-mentioned “_Berlin Couleur_”. The _mass_
of humanity which is seriously concerned with Critical Criticism is
confined to a Berlin Couleur.

The “Berlin Couleur”, the “_essential object_” of Critical Criticism, of
which it is always thinking and which, Critical Criticism imagines, is
always thinking of Critical Criticism, consists, as far as we know, of a
few _ci-devant_ [former] _Young Hegelians_ in whom Critical Criticism
claims to inspire partly a _horror vacui_ [horror of emptiness] and
partly a feeling of _futility_. We are not investigating the actual
state of affairs, we rely on what _Criticism_ says.

The _Correspondence_ is mainly intended to expound _at length_ to the
public this _world-historic_ relation of _Criticism_ to the “Berlin
Couleur”, to reveal its profound significance, to show why _Criticism_
must necessarily be cruel towards this “Mass”, and finally to make it
appear that _the whole world_ is in fearful agitation over this
opposition, expressing itself now in favour of, and then against the
actions of _Criticism_. For example, _Absolute_ Criticism writes to a
correspondent who sides with the “Berlin Couleur":

“I have _already_ heard things like that _so often_ that I have made up
my mind not to take any more notice of them.”

The world has no idea how often it has dealt with Critical things _like
that._

Let us now hear what a member of the Critical Mass reports on the Berlin
Couleur:

“'If anyone recognises the Bauers'” (the Holy Family must always be
recognised _pêle-mêle_) “began his answer [The reference is to the
answer given by an adherent to the Berlin Couleur to one of the authors
of the anonymous report “Aus der Provinz” published in the Allgemeine
Literatur-Zeitung. Heft VI, May 1844] — _I_ am the one. But the
_Literatur-zeitung_! Let us be quite fairl’ It was interesting for me to
hear what one of those radicals, those clever men of anno 42, thought of
you....”

The correspondent goes on to repckrt that the unfortunate man had all
sorts of reproaches to make to the _Literatur-Zeitung_.

Herr Edgar’s short story, _Die drei Biedermdnner_ he found lacking in
polish and exaggerated. He could not understand that _censorship_ is not
so much a fight of man against man, an external fight, as an internal
one. They do not take the trouble to bethink themselves and to replace
the _phrase the censor_ _okects to_ by a _cleverly_ expressed and
thoroughly developed _Critical thought_. He found Herr Edgar’s essay on
Béraud lacking in thoroughness. The Critical reporter thinks it was
thorough. True he admitted himself: “I have _not_ read Béraud’s book.”
But he _believes_ that Herr Edgar has _succeeded_, etc., and belief, we
know, is bhss. “In general,” the Critical believer continues, “he” (the
one from the Berlin Couleur) “is _not at_ _all satisfied_ with Herr
Edgar’s works.” He also finds that “_Proudhon_ is not dealt with
_thoroughly_ enough”. And here the reporter gives Herr Edgar a
testimonial:

“_It is true_” _(1?) “_ _that Iam acquainted with Proudhon_. I _know_
that Edgar’s presentation took the _characteristic_ points from him and
set them out clearly.”

The only reason why Herr Edgar’s _excellent_ criticism of Proudhon is
not liked, the reporter says, can only be that Herr Edgar does _not
fulminate_ against property. And just imagine it, the opponent finds
Herr Edgar’s essay on the “_Union ouvrière_"’ _unimportant_. To console
Herr Edgar the reporter says:

“Of course, it does not give anything _independent_, and these people
have really gone back to _Gruppe’s_ point of view, which, to be sure,
they have _always maintained_. Criticism must give, give and _give!_”

As though Criticism had not given quite new linguistic, historical,
philosophical, economic, and juridical discoveriesl And it is so modest
as to let itself be told that it has not given anything _independent_!
Even our Critical correspondent gave mechanics something that it had not
hitherto known when he made people _go back_ _to the same_ point of view
which they had always _maintained_. It is clumsy to recall _Gruppe’s_
point of view. In his pamphlet, which is otherwise miserable and not
worth mentioning, Gruppe asked Herr Bruno what criticism he could give
on _speculative logic._^([65]) Herr Bruno referred him to future
generations and —

“a fool is waiting for an answer”.
[H, Heine, Die Nordue, second cycle “Fragen"]

As God punished the unbelieving Pharaoh by hardening his heart and did
_not think_ him _worthy_ of being enlightened, so the reporter assures
us:

“They are therefore _not at all worthy_ of seeing or knowing the
contents of your _Literatur-Zeitung_.”

And instead of advising his friend Edgar to acquire thoughts and
knowledge he gives him the following advice:

“Let Edgar get a _bag of phrases_ and draw blindly out of it when he
writes essays in future, in order to acquire a style in harmony with the
public.”

Besides assurances of “a certain fury, ill-favour, emptiness,
thoughtlessness, an inkling of something which they are not able to
fathom, and a feeling of nullity” (all these epithets apply, of course,
to the Berlin Couleur), eulogies like the following are made of the Holy
Family:

“Lightness of treatment penetrating the matter, command of the
categories, insight acquired by study, in a word, _command_ of _the_
Objects. He” (of the Berlin Coulcur) “takes an easy attitude to the
thing, you make the thing easy.” Or: “Your criticism in the
_Literatur-Zeitung_ is pure, graphic and relevant.”

Finally it is stated:

“I have written it all to you at such length because I know that I shall
give you _pleasure_ by reporting the opinions of my friend. From this
you can see that the _Literatur-Zeitung_ is fulfilling its purpose.”

Its purpose is opposition to the Berlin Coulcur. Having just witnessed
the _Berlin Couleur’s polemic_ against Critical Criticism and the
reproof it received for that polemic, we are now giuen a double picture
of its efforts to obtain mercy from Critical Criticism.

One correspondent writes:

“My acquaintances in Berlin told me when I was there at the beginning of
the year that you repel all and keep all at a distance; that you keep
yourself to yourself and let nobody approach you, assiduously avoiding
all intercourse. 1, of course, cannot tell which side is to blame.”

_Absolute_ Criticism replies:

“Criticism does _not_ form any _party_ and will have no party of its
own; it is _solitary_ because it is engrossed in _its_” (!) “object and
opposes itself to it. It _isolates itself from everything_.”

Critical Criticism thinks it rises above all dogmatic antitheses by
substituting for the real antitheses the imaginary antithesis between
_itself and the world_, between the _Holy Ghost_ and the _profane_
_Mass._ In the same way it thinks it rises _above parties_ by falling
_below the party point of view_, by counterposing itself as a _party_ to
the rest of mankind and concentrating all interest in the personality of
Herr Bruno and Co. The truth of Criticism’s _admission_ that it sits
enthroned in the solitude of _abstraction_, that even when it seems to
be occupied with some _object_ it does not come out of its objectless
solitude into a truly social relation to a _real_ _object,_ because _its
object_ is only the object of its _imagination_, only an imaginary
object — the truth of this Critical _admission_ is proved by the whole
of our exposition. Equally correctly Criticism defines its _abstraction_
as _absolute_ abstraction, in the sense that “it _isolates_ itself _from
everything_”, and precisely this isolation of _nothing from everything_,
from _all_ thought., contemplation, etc., is _absolute nonsense_.
Incidentally, the solitude which it achieves by isolating and
abstracting itself from _everything_ is no more free from the object
from which it abstracts itself than _Origen_ was from the _genital
organ_ that he _isolated_ from himself.

Another correspondent begins by describing _one_ of the members of the
“Berlin Couleur”, whom he saw and spoke with, as “gloomy”, “depressed”,
“no longer able to open his mouth” (although he was formerly always
“ready with a quite _impudent_ word”), and “despondent”. This member of
the “Berlin Couleur” related the following to the correspondent, who in
turn reported it to Criticism:

“He cannot grasp how people like you two, who formerly respected the
principle of humanity, can behave in such an aloof, repelling, indeed
arrogant manner.” He does not know “why there are some people who, it
seems, Intentionally cause a split. Have we not all the same point of
view? Do we not all _pay homage_ to the extreme, to Criticism? Are we
not all capable, if not of producing, at least of grasping and applying
an extreme thought?” He “finds that this split is motivated by no other
principle than egoism and arrogance”.

Then the correspondent puts in a good word:

“Have not at least some of our friends grasped _Criticism_, or perhaps
_the good will of Criticism_ .. ‘_ut desint vires, tamen est laudanda
voluntas’._” [the strength may he lacking, but the will is praiseworthy]

_Criticism_ replies with the following _antitheses_ between itself and
the Berlin Couleur:

“There are _various_ standpoints on criticism.” The members of the
Berlin Couleur “thought they had criticism in their pocket”, but
Criticism “really knows and applies the force of criticism”, i.e., does
not keep it in its pocket. For the former, criticism is pure form,
whereas for Criticism, on the other hand, it is the “_most substantial_
or rather the only substantial thing”. Just as Absolute Thought
considers itself the whole of reality, so does Critical Criticism. That
is why it sees no content _outside_ _itself_ and is therefore not the
criticism of _real_ objects existing outside the Critical subject; on
the contrary, it _makes_ the object, it is the Absolute
_Subject-Object_. Further! “The former kind of criticism disposes of
everything, of the investigation of things, by means of phrases. The
latter isolates itself _from everything_ by means of phrases.” The
former is “_clever in ignorance_”, the latter is “learning”. The latter,
at any rate, is not clever, it learns _par ça, par là_ [here and there],
but only in appearance, only in order to be able to fling what it has
superficially learnt from the Mass back at the Mass in the form of a
“catchword”, as wisdom that it itself has discovered, and to resolve it
into the nonsense of Critical Criticism.

“For the former, words such as ‘extreme’, ‘proceed’, ‘not go far enough’
are of importance and highly revered categories; the latter investigates
the _standpoints_ and does not apply to them the _measures_ of those
abstract categories.”

The exclamations of Criticism No. 2 that it is no longer a question of
politics, that philosophy is done away with, and its dismissal of social
systems and developments by means of words like “fantastic”, “utopian”,
etc. — what is all that if not a _Critically revised_ version of
“proceeding” and “not going far enough"? And are not its “measures”,
such as “_History_”, “_Criticism_”, “summing up of objects”, “the old
and the new”, “Criticism and Mass”, “investigation of standpoints” — in
a. word, are not all its catch-words _categorical measures_ and
abstractly categorical ones at that! ?

“The former is theological, spiteful, envious, petty, presumptuous, the
latter is the _opposite_ of all that.”

After thus praising itself a dozen times in one breath and ascribing to
itself all that the Berlin Couleur lacks, just as God is all that _man
is not, Criticism_ bears witness to itself that:

“It has achieved a clarity, a thirst for learning, a tranquillity in
which it is _unassailable_ and _invincible_.”

Hence it can “at the most treat” its opponent, the Berlin Couleur, “with
_Olympic laughter_”. This _laughter_ — it explains with its customary
thoroughness what it is and what it is not — “this laughter is not
arrogance”. By no means! It is the negation of the negation. It is
“_only_ _the process_ that _the Critic must apply_ in all ease and
equanimity against a _subordinate standpoint_ which _thinks_ itself
_equal_ to him” (what conceit!). When _the_ Critic laughs, therefore, he
is _applying a process!_ And “in all equanimity” he applies the _process
of laughter_ not against _persons_, but against a _standpoint_! Even
_laughter_ is a category which he applies and even _must_ apply!

_Extramundane_ Criticism is not an _essential activity_ of the _human
subject_ who is _real_ and therefore lives and suffers in _present-day_
society, sharing in its pains and pleasures. The _real_ individual is
only an _accidental feature_, an earthly vessel of _Critical Criticism_,
which reveals itself in it as _eternal Substance_. The subject is not
the human individual’s criticism, but the _non-human individual of
Criticism_. Criticism is not a _manifestation of man_, but man is an
_alienation of Criticism_, and that is why the Critic lives completely
outside society.

“Can the Critic live in the society which he criticises?”

It should be asked instead: Must he not live in that society? Must he
not himself be a manifestation of the life of that society? Why does the
Critic _sell_ the products of his mind, for thereby he makes the worst
law of present-day society his own law?

“_The_ Critic must not even dare to mix _personally_ with society.”

That is why he creates for himself a _Holy Family_, just as the solitary
God endeavours in the Holy Family to end his tedious isolation from
society. If the Critic _wants to free himself_ from _bad_ _society_ he
must first of all free himself from _his_ _own society._

“Thus the Critic dispenses with _all the pleasures of society,_ but _its
sufferings_, too, stay remote from him. He knows neither friendship”
(except that of Critical friends) “nor love” (except _self-love) “_but
on the other hand calumny is powerless against him; nothing can offend
him; no hatred, no envy can affect him; vexation and grief are _feelings
unknown_ to him.”

In short, the Critic is free from all _human passions_, he is a _divine
person_; he can apply to himself the song of the nun.

I think not of a lover,
I think not of a spouse.
I think of God the Father
For he my life endows.
[From the German folk-song Die Nonne published in the book by F. K.
Freiherr von Erlach, Die Volkstieder der Deutschen, Bd. IV]

Criticism cannot write a single passage without contradicting itself.
Thus it tells us finally:

“The Philistinism that stones the Critic” (he has to be stoned by
analogy with the Bible), “that misjudges him and ascribes _impure_
motives to him” (ascribes _impure_ motives to _pure_ Criticism!) “in
order to make _him equal to itself_” (the conceit of equality reproved
above!), “is _not laughed_ _at_ by him, because it is not worth it, but
is seen through and calmly rciezated to its own insignificant
significance.”

Earlier the Critic _had to_ apply the _process of laughter_ to the
“subordinate standpoint that thought itself equal to him”. Critical
Critkism’s unclarity about its mode of procedure with the godless “Mass”
seems almost to indicate an interior irritation, a sort of bile to which
“feelings” are not “unknown”.

However, there should be no misunderstanding. Having waged·a Herculean
struggle _to free_ itself from the uncritical “profane Mass” and
“everything”, Critical Criticism has at last succeeded in achieving its
_solitary_, _god-like, self-sufficient, absolute_ existence. If in its
first pronouncement in this, its “new phase”, the old world of _sinful
feelings_ seems still to have some power over it, we shall now see
Criticism find aesthetic relaxation and _transfiguration_ in an
“_artistic form_” and complete its _penance_ so it can finally as a
second triumphant _Christ_ accomplish the _Critical last judgment_ and
after its victory over the dragon ascend calmly to heaven.



CHAPTER VIII


The Earthly Course and Transfiguration Of “Critical Criticism”, Or “Critical Criticism” As Rudolph, Prince of Geroldstein

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[In this chapter Marx continues his criticism of Szeliga’s _article
“Eugène Sue: Die Geheimnisse von Paris_"]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

_Rudolph_, Prince of Geroldstein, _does penance_ in his _earthly course_
for a _double_ crime: his _personal_ crime and that of _Critical
Criticism_. In a furious dialogue he drew his sword against his father;
Critical Criticism, also in a furious dialogue, let itself be carried
away by sinful feelings against the Mass. Critical Criticism did not
reveal a _single_ mystery. Rudolph does penance for that and reveals
_all_ mysteries.

Rudolph, Herr Szeliga informs us, is the _first_ servant of the _state_
of humanity (the _Humanitätsstaat_ of the Swabian _Egidius_. See
_Konstitutionelle Jahrbücher_ by Dr. Karl Weil, 1844, Bd. 266).

For _the world not to be destroyed,_ Herr Szeliga asserts, it is
necessary that

“Men of ruthless criticism appear.... Rudolph is _such_ a man....
Rudolph grasps the thought of _pure criticism_. And that thought is more
fruitful for him and mankind than _all_ the experiences of the latter in
its _history_, than _all_ the knowledge that Rudolph, guided even by the
most reliable teacher, was able to derive from that history.... The
impartial judgment by which Rudolph perpetuates his _earthly_ _course_
is, _in fact_, nothing but

_the revelation of the mysteries of society._"
He is: “_the revealed mystery of all mysteries._”

Rudolph has far more external means at his disposal than the other men
of Critical Criticism. But the latter consoles itself:

“Unattainable for those less favoured by destiny are Rudolph’s
_results_” (!), “not unattainable is the splendid goal

That is why Criticism leaves the _realisation_ of its own _thoughts_ to
Rudolph, who is so favoured by destiny. It sings to him:

_Hahnemann_, go on ahead.
You've waders on, you won’t get wet!
[From German folk-tale Sieben Schwaben publ. in Volksbücher, hrsg. V. G.
O. Marbach]

Let us accompany Rudolph in his Critical earthly course, which “is _more
fruitful_ for _mankind_ than _all the experiences_ of the latter in its
history, than _all the knowledge_” etc., and which twice saves the world
from _destruction_.

1) Critical Transformation of a Butcher into a Dog, Or Chourineur

_Chourineur_ [French thieves’ slang for a murderous ruffian] was a
butcher by trade. Owing to a concourse of circumstances, this mighty son
of nature becomes a murderer. Rudolph comes across him accidentally just
when he is molesting Fleur de Marie. Rudolph gives the dexterous brawler
a few impressive, masterly punches on the head, and thus wins his
respect. Later, in the tavern frequented by criminals, Chourineur’s
kind-hearted disposition is revealed. “You still have heart and honour,”
Rudolph says to him. By these words he instils in Chourineur respect for
himself. Chourineur is reformed or, as Herr Szeliga says, is transformed
into a “_moral being_”. Rudolph takes him under his protection. Let us
follow the course of Chourineur’s education under the guidance of
Rudolph.

_Ist Stage._ The first lesson Chourineur receives is a lesson in
hypocrisy, faithlessness, craft and _dissimulation_. Rudolph uses the
reformed Chourineur in exactly the same way as _Vidocq_ used the
criminals he had reformed, i.e., he makes him a _mouchard_ [police spy]
and _agent provocateur_. He advises him to “_pretend_” to the “_maître
d'école_” [nickname given by his fellow criminals] that he has altered
his “principle of not stealing” and to suggest a robbery so as to lure
him into a trap set by Rudolph. Chourineur feels that he is being made a
fool of. He protests against the suggestion of playing the role of
_mouchard_ and _agent provocateur_. Rudolph easily convinces the son of
nature by the “_pure_” _casuistry_ of Critical Criticism that a foul
trick is not foul when it is done for “_good, moral_” reasons.
Chourineur, as an _agent provocateur_ and under the pretence of
friendship and confidence, lures his former companion to destruction.
For the first time in his life he commits an act of _infamy_.

_2nd_ _Stage._ We next find Chourineur acting as _garde-malade_ [sick
attendant] to Rudolph, whom he has saved from mortal danger.

Chourineur has become such a _respectable moral_ being that he rejects
the Negro doctor David’s suggestion to sit on the floor, for fear of
dirtying the carpet. He is indeed too _shy_ to sit on a chair. He first
lays the chair on its back and then sits on the front legs. He never
fails to apologise when he addresses Rudolph, whom he saved from a
mortal danger, as “friend” or “_Monsieur_” instead of “_Monseigneur_”.

What a wonderful training of the ruthless son of nature! Chourineur
expresses the innermost secret of his Critical transformation when he
admits to Rudolph that he has the same attachment for him as a _bulldog_
for its master: “Je me sens pour vous, comme qui dirait _l'attachement_
d'un _bouledogue_ pour _son maître_.” The former butcher is transformed
into a dog. Henceforth all his virtues will be reduced to the virtue of
a dog, pure “_dévouement’_ to its master. His independence, his
individuality will disappear completely. But just as bad painters have
to label their pictures to say what they are supposed to represent,
Eugène Sue has to put a label on “_bulldog_” Chourineur, who constantly
affirms: “The two words, ‘You still have heart and honour’, made a man
out of me.” Until his very last breath, Chourineur will find the motive
for his actions, not in his human individuality, but in that label. As
proof of his moral reformation he will often reflect on his own
excellence and the wickedness of other individuals. And every time he
throws out moral sentences, Rudolph will say to him: “I like to hear you
_speak_ like that.” Chourineur has not become an ordinary _bulldog_ but
a _moral one._

_3rd_ _Stage._ We have already admired the _petty-bourgeois_
_respectabili_ty which has taken the place of Chourineur’s coarse but
_daring_ unceremoniousness. We now learn that, as befits a “_moral
being_”, he has also adopted the gait and demeanour of the _petty
bourgeois_.

“_A le voir marcher — on l'eût pris pour_ le bourgeois _le plus
inoffensif du monde_."
[To see him walk you would have taken him for the most harmless
bourgeois in the world]

Still sadder than this form is the content that Rudolph gives his
Critically reformed life. He sends him to Africa “to serve as a living
and salutary example of repentance to the world of unbelievers”. In
future, he will have to represent, not his own human nature, but a
Christian dogma.

_4th Stage._ The Critically moral transformation has made Chourineur a
quiet, cautious man who behaves according to the rules of fear and
worldly wisdom.

“Le Chourineur”, reports Murph, who in his indiscreet simplicity
continually tells tales out of school “n'a pas dit un mot de l'éxecution
du maître d'école, de _peur_ de se trouver compromise"
[Chourineur said nothing of the punishment meted out to the maître
d'école for fear of compromising himself]

So Chourineur knows that the punishment of the maítre _d'école_ was an
illegal act. But he does not talk about it for fear of compromising
himself. _Wise_ Chourineur!

_5th Stage._ Chourineur has carried his moral education to such
perfection that he gives his _dog-like_ attitude to Rudolph a civilised
form-he becomes conscious of it. After saving _Germain_ from a mortal
danger he says to him:

“I have a protector who is to me what _God_ is to _priests_ — he is such
as to make one kneel before him.”

And in imagination he kneels before his God.

“Monsieur Rudolph,” he says to Germain, “protects you. I say
‘_Monsieur’_ though I should say ‘_Monseigneur’._ But I am used to
calling him ‘_Monsieur_ Rudolph’, and he allows me to.”

“Magnificent awakening and flowering!” exclaims Szeliga in Critical
delight.

_6th Stage._ Chourineur worthily ends his career of pure _dévouement_,
or moral bulldogishness, by finally letting himself be stabbed to death
for his gracious lord. At the moment when Squelette threatens the prince
with his knife, Chourineur stays the murderer’s arm. Squelette stabs
him. But, dying, Chourineur says to Rudolph:

“I was right when I said that a _lump of earth_” (a bulldog) “like me
can sometimes be useful to a _great and gracious master_ like you.”

To this dog-like utterance, which sums up the whole of Chourineur’s
Critical life like an epigram, the label put in his mouth adds:

“We are quits, Monsieur Rudolph. You told me that I had heart and
honour.”

Herr Szeliga cries as loud as he can:

“What a merit it was for ‘Rudolph to have restored the _Schuriman_
[Germanised form of Chourineur] (?) “to _mankind_ (?)!”

2) Revelation of The Mystery of Critical Religion, Or Fleur De Marie

------------------------------------------------------------------------

["_Fleur de Marie_” is translated by the authors into German as
“_Marien-Blume_” which means _Marguerite_]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

a) The Speculative “Marguerite"'

A word more about Herr Szeliga’s speculative “Marguerite” before we go
on to Eugène Sue’s Fleur de Marie.

The speculative “Marguerite” is above all a _correction_. The fact is
that the reader could conclude from Herr Szeliga’s construction that
Eugène Sue had

“separated the presentation of the objective basis” (of the “world
system”) “from the development of the acting individual forces which can
he understood only against that background”.

Besides the task of correcting this erroneous conjecture that the reader
may have made from Herr Szeliga’s presentation, Marguerite has also a
metaphysical mission in our, or rather Herr Szeliga’s, “epic”.

“The _world system_ and an epic event _would still_ _not_ be
artistically united in a really _single_ whole if they were only
interspersed in a motley mixture — now here a bit of world system and
then there some stage play. If _real unity_ is to result, both things.
the mysteries of this prejudiced _world_ and the clarity, frankness and
confidence with which _Rudolph_ penetrates and reveals them, must clash
in a _single_ individual ... This is the task of Marguerite.”

Herr Szeliga speculatively constructs Marguerite by analogy with
_Bauer’s_ construction of the _Mother_ _of God._

On one side is the “_divine element_” (_Rudolph_) to, which “all power
and freedom” are attributed, the only _active_ principle. On the other
side is the passive “_world_ _system_” and the human beings belonging to
it. The world system is the “ground of reality”. If this ground is not
to be “entirely abandoned” or “the last remnant of the natural condition
is not to be abolished”; if the world itself is to have some share in
the “principle of development” that Rudolph, in contrast to the world,
concentrates in himself; if “the human element is not to be represented
simply as unfree and inactive”, Herr Szeliga is bound to fall into the
“contradiction of religious consciousness”. Although he tears apart the
world system and its activity as the dualism of a dead Mass and
Criticism (Rudolph), he is nevertheless obliged to concede some
attributes of divinity to the world system and the mass and to give in
Marguerite a speculative construction of the unity of the two, Rudolph
and the world (see _Kritik der Synoptiker_, Band 1, p. 39).

Besides the real relations of the _house-owner_, the acting “individual
force”, to his _house_ (the “objective basis”), mystical speculation,
and speculative aesthetics too, need a third _concrete, speculative
unity_, a _Subject-Object_ which is the house and the house-owner in
_one_. As speculation does not like natural mediations in their
extensive circumstantiality, it does not realise that the same “bit of
world system”, the house, for example, which for one, the house-owner,
for example, is an “objective basis”, is for the other, the builder of
the house, an “epic event”. In order to get a “really single whole” and
“real unity"’ Critical Criticism, which reproaches “romantic art” with
the “dogma of unity”, replaces the natural and human connection between
the world system and world events by a fantastic connection, a mystical
Subject-Object, just as _Hegel replaces_ the real connection between man
and nature by an absolute Subject-Object which is at one and the same
time the whole of nature and the whole of humanity, the _Absolute
Spirit_.

In the Critical Marguerite “the universal guilt of the time, the guilt
of mystery”, becomes the “_mystery of guilt_”, just as the universal
debt [a pun on the word “Schuld” which means “guilt” and “debt"] of
mystery becomes _the mystery of debts_ in the indebted _Epicier_
[grocer].

According to the Mother-of-God construction, Marguerite should really
have been the _mother of Rudolph_, the redeemer of the world. Herr
Szeliga expressly says:

“According to the _logical sequence,_ Rudolph should have been the _son_
of Marguerite.”

Since, however, he is not her son, but her father, Herr Szeliga finds in
this “the new mystery that the present often bears in its womb the long
departed past instead of the future”. He even reveals another mystery, a
still greater one, a mystery which directly contradicts mass-type
statistics, the mystery that

“a child, if it does not, in its turn, become a father or mother, but
goes to its grave pure and innocent, is ... _essentially_ ... a
_daughter_”.

Herr Szeliga faithfully follows Hegel’s speculation when, according to
the “_logical_ sequence”, he regards the daughter as the mother of her
father. In Hegel’s philosophy of history, as in his philosophy of
nature, the son engenders the mother, the spirit nature, the Christian
religion paganism, the result the beginning.

After proving that according to the “_logical sequence_” Marguerite
ought to have been Rudolph’s mother, Herr Szeliga proves the opposite:

“in order to conform fully to the _idea_ she embodies in _our_ epic, she
must _never_ _become a mother_”.

This shows at least that the idea of our epic and Herr Szeliga’s logical
sequence are mutually contradictory.

The speculative Marguerite is nothing but the “_embodiment of an idea_”.
But what idea?

“She has the task of representing, _as it were_, the last tear of grief
that the past sheds prior to its final passing away.”

She is the representation of an allegorical tear, and even this little
that she is, is only “_as it were_”.

We shall not follow Herr Szeliga in his further description of
Marguerite. We shall leave her the satisfaction, according to Herr
Szeliga’s prescription, of “constituting _the most decisive_ antithesis
to _everyone_”, a mysterious antithesis, as mysterious as the attributes
of God.

Neither shall we delve into the “_true mystery_” that is “deposited _by
God_ in the breast of man” and at which the speculative Marguerite “as
it were” hints. We shall pass from Herr Szeliga’s Marguerite to Eugène
Sue’s Fleur de Marie and to the Critical miraculous cures Rudolph
accomplishes on her.

b) Fleur de Marie

We meet Marie surrounded by criminals, as a prostitute in bondage to the
proprietress of the criminals’ tavern. In this debasement she preserves
a human nobleness of soul, a human unaffectedness and a human beauty
that impress those around her, raise her to the level of a poetical
flower of the criminal world and win for her the name of Fleur de Marie.

We must observe Fleur de Marie attentively from her first appearance in
order to be able to compare her _original form_ with her _Critical
transformation_.

In spite of her frailty, Fleur de Marie at once gives proof of vitality,
energy, cheerfulness, resilience of character — qualities which alone
explain her human development in her _inhuman_ situation.

When Chourineur ill-treats her, she defends herself with her scissors.
That is the situation in which we first find her. She does not appear as
a defenceless lamb who surrenders without any resistance to overwhelming
brutality; she is a girl who can vindicate her rights and put up a
fight.

In the criminals’ tavern in the Rue aux Fèves she tells Chourineur and
Rudolph the story of her life. As she does so she _laughs_ at
Chourineur’s wit. She blames herself because on being released from
prison she spent the 300 francs she had earned there on amusements
instead of looking for work. “But,” she said, “I had no one to advise
me.” The memory of the catastrophe of her life — her selling herself to
the proprietress of the criminals’ tavern — puts her in a melancholy
mood. It is the first time since her childhood that she has recalled
these events.

“Le fait est, que ça me chagrine de regarder ainsi derrière moi ... a
doit être bien bon d'être honnête."
[The fact is that it grieves me when I look back in this way ... it must
he lovely to be honest]

When Chourineur makes fun of her and tells her she must become honest,
she exclaims:

“Honnête, mon dieu! et avec quoi donc veux-tu que je sois honnête?"
[Honest! My God! What do you want me to be honest with?]

She insists that she is not one “to have fits of tears": “_Je ne suis
pas pleurnicheuse_” [I am no cry-baby]; but her position in life is sad
— “_Ça nest pas gai._” [It isn’t a happy one] Finally, contrary to
Christian _repentance_, she pronounces on the past the human sentence,
at once _Stoic_ and Epicurean, of a free and strong nature:

Enfin ce qui est fait, est fait."
[Well, what is done is done]

Let us accompany Fleur de Marie on her first outing with Rudolph.

“The consciousness of your terrible situation has probably often
distressed you,” Rudolph says, itching to moralise.

“Yes,” she replies, “more than once I looked over the embankment of the
Seine; but then I would gaze at the flowers and the sun and say to
myself: the river will always he there and I am not yet seventeen years
old. Who can say? “_On such occasions it seemed to me that I had not
deserved my fate, that I had something good in me. People have tormented
me enough, I used to say to myself, but at least I have never done any
harm to anyone_.”

Fleur de Marie considers her situation not as one she has freely
created, not as the expression of her own personality, but as a fate she
has not deserved. Her bad fortune can change. She is still young.

_Good_ and _evil_, as Marie conceives them, are not the _moral
abstractions_ of good and evil. She is _good_ because she has never
caused _suffering_ to anyone, she has always been _human_ towards her
inhuman surroundings. She is _good_ because the sun and the flowers
reveal to her her own sunny and blossoming nature. She is good because
she is still _young_, full of hope and vitality. Her situation is _not
good_, because it puts an unnatural constraint on her, because it is not
the expression of her human impulses, not the fulfilment of her human
desires; because it is full of torment and without joy. She measures her
situation in life by ‘ her own _individuality_, her _essential nature_,
not by _the ideal of what is good._

In _natural_ surroundings, where the chains of bourgeois life fall away
and she can freely manifest her own nature, Fleur de Marie bubbles over
with love of life, with a wealth of feeling, with human joy at the
beauty of nature; these show that her social position has only grazed
the surface of her and is a mere misfortune, that she herself is neither
good nor bad, but _human_.

“_Monsieur Rudolph, what happiness! ... grass, fields! If you would
allow me to get out, the weather is so fine ... I should love so much to
run about in these meadows._”

Alighting from the carriage, she plucks flowers for Rudolph, can hardly
speak for joy”, etc., etc.

Rudolph tells her that he is going to take her to _Madame George’s
farm_. There she can see dove-cotes, cow-stalls and so forth; there they
have milk, butter, fruit, etc. Those are real _blessings_ for this
child. She will be merry, that is her main thought. “_You can’t believe
how I am longing for some fun!_” She explains to Rudolph in the most
unaffected way her own share of responsibility for her misfortune. “_My
whole fate is due to the fact that I did not save up my money_.” She
therefore advises him to be thrifty and to put money in the
savings-bank. Her fancy runs wild in the castles in the air that Rudolph
builds for her. She becomes sad only because she

“has forgotten the present” and “the contrast of that present with the
dream of a joyous and laughing existence reminds her of the cruelty of
her situation”.

So far we have seen Fleur de Marie in her original un-Critical form.
Eugène Sue has risen above the horizon of his narrow world outlook. He
has slapped bourgeois prejudice in the face. He will hand over Fleur de
Marie to the hero Rudolph to atone for his temerity and to reap applause
from all old men and women, from the whole of the Paris police, from the
current religion and from “Critical Criticism”.

Madame George, to whom Rudolph entrusts Fleur de Marie, is an unhappy,
hypochondriacal religious woman. She immediately welcomes the child with
the unctuous words: “_God_ blesses those who love and fear him, who have
been unhappy and who _repent_.” Rudolph, the man of “pure Criticism”,
has the wretched priest _Laporte_, whose hair has greyed in
superstition, called in. He has the mission of accomplishing Fleur de
Marie’s Critical reform.

Joyfully and unaffectedly Marie approaches the old priest. In his
Christian brutality, _Eugène Sue_ makes a “marvellous instinct” at once
whisper in her ear that “_shame_ ends where _repentance_ and _penance_
begin”, that is, in the church, which alone saves. He forgets the
unconstrained merriness of the outing, a merriness which nature’s grace
and Rudolph’s friendly sympathy had produced, and which was troubled
only by the thought of having to go back to the criminals’ landlady.

The priest Laporte immediately adopts a _supermundane_ attitude. His
first words are:

“_God’s_ mercy is infinite, my dear child! He has proved it to you by
not abandoning you in your severe trials.... The magnanimous man who
saved you fulfilled the _word of the Scriptures_” (note — the word of
the Scriptures, not a human purpose!): “Verily the Lord is nigh to those
who invoke him; he will fulfil their desires ... he will hear their
voice and will save them ... the Lord will accomplish _his_ work.”

Marie cannot yet understand the evil meaning of the priest’s
exhortations. She answers:

“I shall pray for those who pitied me and brought me back to God.”

Her first thought is _not_ for God, it is for her _human_ saviour and
she wants to pray for _him_, not for her _own_ absolution. She
attributes to her prayer some influence on the salvation of others.
Indeed, she is still so naive that she supposes she has _already been
brought back_ to God. The priest feels it is his duty to destroy this
unorthodox illusion.

“Soon,” he says, interrupting her, “soon you will deserve absolution,
absolution from your great errors ... for, to quote the prophet once
more, the Lord holdeth up those who are on the brink of falling.”

One should not fail to see the inhuman expressions the priest uses. Soon
you will deserve absolution. Your sins are _not yet forgiven_.

As Laporte, when he receives the girl, bestows on her the _consciousness
of her sins_, so Rudolph, when he leaves her, presents her with a gold
_cross_, the symbol of the _Christian crucifixion_ awaiting her.

Marie has already been living for some time on Madame George’s farm. Let
us first listen to a dialogue between the old priest Laporte and Madame
George.

He considers “marriage” out of the question for Marie “because no man,
in spite of the priest’s guarantee, will have the courage to face the
past that has soiled her youth”. He adds: “she has great errors to atone
for, her moral sense ought to have kept her upright.”

He proves, as the commonest of bourgeois would, that she could have
remained good: “There are many virtuous people in Paris today.” The
hypocritical priest knows quite well that at any hour of the day, in the
busiest streets, those virtuous people of Paris pass indifferently by
little girls of seven or eight years who sell _allumettes_ [matches],
and the like until about midnight as Marie herself used to do and who,
almost without exception, will have the same fate as Marie.

The priest has made up his mind concerning Marie’s _penance_; in his own
mind he has already _condemned_ her.. Let us follow Marie when she is
accompanying Laporte home in the evening.

“See, my child,” he begins with unctuous eloquence, “the boundless
horizon the limits of which are no longer visible” (for it is evening),
“it seems to me that the calm and the vastness almost give us an idea of
eternity.... I am telling you this, Marie, because you are sensitive to
the beauties of creation.... I have often been moved by the religious
admiration which they inspire in you-you who for so long were deprived
of religious feeling.”

The priest has already succeeded in changing Marie’s immediate naive
pleasure in the beauties of nature into a _religious_ admiration. For
her, _nature_ has already become devout, _Christianised_ nature, debased
to _creation_. The transparent sea of space is desecrated and turned
into the dark symbol of stagnant _eternity_. She has already learnt that
all human manifestations of her being were “_profane_”, devoid of
religion, of real consecration, that they were impious and godless. The
priest must soil her in her own eyes, he must trample underfoot her
natural, spiritual resources and means of grace, in order to make her
receptive to the supernatural means of grace he promises her, _baptism_.

When Marie wants to make a confession to him and asks him to be lenient
he answers:

“The _Lord_ has shown you that he is merciful.”

In the clemency which she is shown Marie must not see a natural,
self-evident attitude of a related human being to her, another human
being. She must see in it an extravagant, supernatural, superhuman mercy
and condescension; in _human leniency_ she must see _divine mercy_. She
must transcendentalise all human and natural relationships by making
them _relationships to God._ The way Fleur de Marie in her answer
accepts the priest’s chatter about divine mercy shows how far she has
already been spoilt by religious doctrine.

As soon as she entered upon her improved situation, she said, she had
felt only her _new happiness_.

“Every instant I thought of Monsieur Rudolph. I often raised my eyes to
heaven, to look there, not for God, but for Monsieur Rudolph, and to
thank him. Yes_, I confess,_ Father, I _thought more_ of him than of
God; for _he_ did for me what God alone could have done.... I was
_happy_, as happy as someone who has escaped a great danger for ever.”

Fleur de Marie already finds it wrong that she took a new happy
situation in life simply for what it _really_ was, that she felt it as a
new happiness, that her attitude to it was a natural, not a supernatural
one. She accuses herself of seeing in the man who rescued her what he
_really_ was, her rescuer, instead of supposing some imaginary saviour,
_God_, in his place. She is already caught in religious hypocrisy, which
takes away from _another_ man what he has deserved in respect of me in
order to give it to God, and which in general regards everything human
in man as alien to him and everything inhuman in him as _really_
belonging to him.

Marie tells us that the _religious transformation_ of her thoughts, her
sentiments, her attitude to life was effected by Madame George and
Laporte.

“When Rudolph took me away from the _Cité_, I already had a vague
consciousness of my degradation. But the education, the advice and
examples I got from you and Madame George made me understand ... that I
had been more guilty than unfortunate.... You and Madame George made me
_realise the infinite depth of my damnation_.”

That is to say she owes to the priest Laporte and Madame George the
replacement of the human and therefore bearable consciousness of her
degradation by the Christian and hence unbearable consciousness of
eternal damnation. The priest and the bigot have taught her to judge
herself from the _Christian point of view_.

Marie feels the depth of the spiritual misfortune into which she has
been cast. She says:

“Since the consciousness of good and evil had to be so frightful for me,
why was I not left to my wretched lot?... Had I not been snatched away
from infamy, misery and blows would soon have killed me. At least I
should have died in ignorance of a purity that I shall always wish for
in vain.”

The heartless priest replies:

“Even the most noble nature, were it to be plunged only for a day in the
filth from which you have been saved, would be _indelibly branded_. That
is the _immutability of divine justice_!”

Deeply wounded by this _priestly curse_ uttered in such honeyed tones,
Fleur de Marie exclaims:

“You see therefore, I must despair!”

The grey-headed slave of religion answers:

“You must renounce hope of effacing this desolate page from your life,
but you must trust in the _infinite mercy of God._ Here _below_, my poor
child, you will have tears, remorse and penance, but one day _up above_,
forgiveness and _eternal bliss!_”

Marie is not yet stupid enough to be satisfied with eternal bliss and
forgiveness up above.

“Pity, pity, my God!” she cries. “I am so young.... _Malheur à moi_!
[Woe unto me!]”

Then the hypocritical sophistry of the priest reaches its peak:

“On the contrary, happiness for you, Marie; happiness for you to whom
the Lord sends this bitter but saving remorse! It shows the religious
susceptibility of your soul.... Each of your sufferings is counted up
above. Believe me, God left you awhile on the path of evil only to
reserve for you the _glory of repentance_ and the eternal reward due to
_atonement_.”

From this moment Marie is _enslaved by the consciousness of sin_. In her
former most unhappy situation in life she was able to develop a lovable,
human individuality; in her outward debasement she was conscious that
_her human essence_ was _her true essence._ Now the filth of modern
society, which has touched her externally, becomes her innermost being,
and continual hypochondriacal self-torture because of that filth becomes
her duty, the task of her life appointed by God himself, the
self-purpose of her existence. Formerly she said of herself “_Je ne suis
pas pleurnicheuse_” and knew that “_ce qui est fait, est fait_”. Now
self-torment will be her good and remorse will be her _glory_.

It turns out later that Fleur de Marie is Rudolph’s daughter. We come
across her again as Princess of Geroldstein. We overhear a conversation
she has with her father:

“_In vain I pray to God to deliver me from these obsessions, to fill my
heart solely with his pious love and his holy hopes; in a word, to take
me entirely, because I wish to give myself entirely to him ... he does
not grant my wishes, doubtless because my earthly preoccupations make me
unworthy of communion with him_.”

When man has realised that his transgressions are _infinite_ crimes
against God he can be sure of _salvation_ and _mercy_ only if he gives
himself _wholly_ to God and becomes _wholly_ dead to the world and
worldly concerns. When Fleur de Marie realises that her delivery from
her inhuman situation in life was a miracle of _God_ she _herself_ has
to become a _saint_ in order to be worthy of such a _miracle_. Her human
love must be transformed into religious love, the striving for happiness
into striving for eternal bliss, worldly satisfaction into holy hope,
communion with people into communion with God. God must take her
entirely. She herself reveals to us why he does not take her entirely.
She has not yet _given_ herself entirely to him, her heart is still
preoccupied and engaged with earthly affairs. This is the last
flickering of her strong nature. She gives herself entirely up to God by
becoming wholly dead to the world and entering a _convent_.

A monastery is no place for him
Who has no stock of sins laid in,
So numerous and great
That be it early, be it late
He may not miss the sweet delight
Of penance for a heart contrite.
[Goethe, Zahme Xenim IX]

In the convent Fleur de Marie is promoted to _abbess_ through the
intrigues of Rudolph. At first she refuses to accept this appointment
because she feels unworthy. The old abbess persuades her:

“_I shall say more, my dear daughter: if before entering the fold your
life had been as full of error as, on the contrary, it was pure and
praiseworthy ... the evangelical virtues of which you have given an
example since you have been here would have atoned for and redeemed your
past in the eyes of the Lord, no matter how sinful it was_.”

From what the abbess says, we see that Fleur de Marie’s earthly virtues
have changed into evangelical virtues, or rather that her real virtues
can no longer appear otherwise than as evangelical caricatures.

Marie answers the abbess:

“_Holy Mother, I now believe that I can accept_.”

Convent life does not suit Marie’s individuality — she dies.
Christianity consoles her only in imagination, or rather her Christian
consolation is precisely the annihilation of her real life and essence —
her death.

So Rudolph first changed Fleur de Marie into a repentant sinner, then
the repentant sinner into a nun and finally the nun into a corpse. At
her funeral not only the Catholic priest, but also the Critical priest
Szeliga preaches a sermon over her grave.

Her “_innocent_” existence he calls her “_transient_” existence,
opposing it to “eternal and unforgettable guilt”. He praises the fact
that her “_last breath_” was a “prayer for forgiveness and pardon”. But
just as the Protestant Minister, after expounding the necessity of the
Lord’s mercy, the participation of the deceased in universal original
sin and the intensity of his consciousness of sin, must praise the
virtues of the departed in _earthly_ terms, so, too, Herr Szeliga uses
the expression:

“And yet _personally_, she has nothing to ask forgiveness for.”

Finally he throws on Marie’s grave the most faded flower of pulpit
eloquence:

“Inwardly pure as human beings seldom are, she has closed her eyes to
this world.”

Amen!

3) Revelation of the Mysteries of Law

a) The _maître d'école,_ or the New Penal Theory. The Mystery of Solitary Confinement Revealed. Medical Mysteries

The _maître d'école_ is a criminal of Herculean strength and great
intellectual vigour. He was brought up an educated and well-schooled
man. This passionate athlete comes into conflict with the laws and
customs of bourgeois society, whose universal yardstick is mediocrity,
delicate morals and quiet trade. He becomes a murderer and abandons
himself to all the excesses of a violent temperament that can nowhere
find a fitting human occupation.

Rudolph captures this criminal. He wants to reform him critically and
set him up as an example for the world of law. He quarrels with the
world of _law_ not over “_punishment_” itself, but over _kinds and
methods_ of punishment. He invents, as the Negro doctor David aptly
expresses it, a penal theory which would be worthy of the “_greatest
German criminal expert_”, and which has since had the good fortune to be
defended by a German criminal expert with German earnestness and German
thoroughness. Rudolph has not the slightest idea that one can rise
_above_ criminal experts: his ambition is to be “the greatest criminal
expert”, _primus inter pares_ [first among equals]. He has the _maître
d'école_ blinded by the Negro doctor David.

At first Rudolph repeats all the trivial objections to capital
punishment: that it has no effect on the criminal and no effect on the
people, for whom it seems to be an entertaining spectacle.

Further Rudolph establishes a difference between the _maître d'école_
and the _soul_ of the _maître d'école._ It is not the man, not the
_real_ _maître d'école_ whom he wishes to save; he wants the _spiritual
salvation_ of his soul.

“The salvation of a soul,” he teaches, “is something holy.... Every
crime can be _atoned_ _for_ and redeemed, the Saviour said, but only if
the criminal earnestly desires to repent and _atone_. The transition
from the court to the scaffold is too short.... You” (the _maître
d'école_) “have criminally misused your _strength_. I shall _paralyse_
your strength ... you will tremble before the weakest, your punishment
will be equal to your crime ... but this terrible punishment will at
least leave you the boundless horizon of _atonement_.... I shall cut you
off only from the outer world in order to plunge you into impenetrable
night and leave you _alone_ with the memory of your ignominious
deeds.... You will be forced to look into yourself ... your
intelligence, which you have degraded, will be roused and will lead you
to atonement.”

Since Rudolph regards the _soul_ as _holy_ and man’s _body_ as
_profane_, since he thus considers only the soul to be the true essence,
because — according to Herr Szeliga’s Critical description of humanity —
it belongs to heaven, the body and the strength of the _maître d'école_
do not belong to humanity, the manifestation of their essence cannot be
given human form or claimed for humanity and cannot be treated as
essentially human. The _maître d'école_ has misused his strength;
Rudolph paralyses, lames, destroys that strength. There is no more
_Critical_ means of getting rid of the perverse manifestations of a
human essential strength than the destruction of this essential
strength. This is the Christian means — plucking out the eye if it
offends or cutting off the hand if it offends, in a word, killing the
body if the body gives offence; for the eye, the hand, the body are
really only superfluous sinful appendages of man. Human nature must be
killed in order to heal its ailments. Mass-type jurisprudence, too, in
agreement here with the Critical, sees in the _laming_ and paralysing of
human strength the antidote to the objectionable manifestations of that
strength.

What Rudolph, the man of pure Criticism, objects to in profane criminal
justice is the too swift transition from the court to the scaffold. He,
on the other hand, wants to link _vengeance_ on the criminal with
_penance_ and _consciousness of sin_ in the criminal, corporal
punishment with spiritual punishment, sensuous torture with the
non-sensuous torture of remorse. Profane punishment must at the same
time be a means of Christian moral education,

This penal theory, which links _jurisprudence_ with _theology_, this
“revealed mystery of the mystery”, is no other than the penal theory of
the _Catholic_ Church, as already expounded at length by _Bentham_ in
his work _Punishments and Rewards_ [Théorie des peines et des
récompenses] In that book Bentham also proved the moral futility of the
punishments of today. He calls legal penalties “_legal parodies_”.

The punishment that Rudolph imposed on the _maître d'école_ is the same
as that which _Origen_ imposed on himself. He _emasculates_ him, robs
him of a _productive organ_, the eye. “The eye is the light of the
body.” [New Testament, Matthew, 6:22] It does great credit to Rudolph’s
religious instinct that he should hit, of all things, upon the idea of
_blinding_. This punishment was current in the thoroughly Christian
empire of Byzantium and came to full flower in the vigorous youthful
period of the Christian-Germanic states of England and France. Cutting
man off from the perceptible outer world, throwing him back into his
abstract inner nature in order to correct him — blinding — is a
necessary consequence of the Christian doctrine according to which the
consummation of this cutting off, the pure isolation of man in his
spiritualistic “_ego_”, is _good itself._ If Rudolph does not shut the
_maître d'école_ up in a real monastery, as was the case in Byzantium
and in Franconia, he at least shuts him up in an ideal monastery, in the
cloister of an impenetrable night which the light of the outer world
cannot pierce, the cloister of an idle conscience and consciousness of
sin filled with nothing but the phantoms of memory.

A certain speculative bashfulness prevents Herr Szeliga from discussing
openly the penal theory of his hero Rudolph that worldly punishment must
be linked with Christian repentance and atonement. Instead he imputes to
him — naturally as a mystery which is only just being revealed to the
world — the theory that punishment must make the criminal the “_judge_”
of his “_own_” crime.

The mystery of this revealed mystery is _Hegel’s_ penal theory.
According to Hegel, the criminal in his punishment passes sentence on
himself. _Gans_ developed this theory at greater length. In Hegel this
is the _speculative disguise_ of the old _jus talionis_ [the right of
retaliation-an eye for an eye], which Kant expounded as the _only
juridical_ penal theory. For Hegel, self-judgment of the criminal
remains a mere “_Idea_”, a mere speculative interpretation of the
_current empirical punishments_ for criminals. He thus leaves the mode
of application to the respective stage of development of the state,
i.e., he leaves punishment as it is. Precisely in that he shows himself
more critical than his Critical echo. A _penal_ theory which at the same
time sees in the criminal the man can do so only in _abstraction_, in
imagination, precisely because _punishment_, _coercion_, is contrary to
_human_ conduct. Moreover, this would be impossible to carry out. Purely
subjective arbitrariness would take the place of the abstract law
because it would always depend on the official, “honourable and decent”
men to adapt the penalty to the individuality of the criminal. Plato
long ago realised that the _law_ must be one-sided and _take no account_
of the individual. On the other hand, under _human_ conditions
punishment will _really_ be nothing but the sentence passed by the
culprit on himself. No one will want to convince him that _violence_
from _without_, done to him by others, is violence which he had done to
himself. On the contrary, he will see in _other_ men his natural
saviours from the punishment which he has imposed on himself; in other
words, the relation will be reversed.

Rudolph expresses his innermost thought — the purpose of blinding the
_maître d'école_ — when he says to him:

“_Chacune de tu paroles sera une prière_."
[every word you say will be a prayer]

He wants to teach him to _pray_. He wants to convert the Herculean
robber into a _monk_ whose only work is prayer. Compared with this
Christian cruelty, how humane is the ordinary penal theory that just
chops a man’s head off when it wants to destroy him. Finally, it goes
without saying that whenever real mass-type legislation was seriously
concerned with improving the criminal it acted incomparably more
sensibly and humanely than the German Harun al-Rashid. The four Dutch
agricultural colonies and the Ostwald penal colony in Alsace are truly
human attempts in comparison with the blinding of the _maître d'école_
just as Rudolph kills Fleur de Marie by handing her over to the priest
and consciousness of sin, just as he kills Chourineur by robbing him of
his human independence and degrading him into a bulldog, so he kills the
_maître d'école_ by having his eyes gouged out in order that he can
learn to “_pray_”.

This is, of course, the way in which all reality emerges “_simply_” out
of “_pure Criticism_”, namely, as a distortion and _senseless
abstraction_ of reality.

Immediately after the blinding of the _maître d'école_ Herr Szeliga
causes a _moral miracle_ to take place.

“The terrible _maître d'école,_” he reports, “_suddenly_ recognises the
power of honesty and decency and says to Schurimann: ‘_Yes, I can trust
you, you have never stolen anything._”

Unfortunately Eugène Sue recorded a statement of the _maître d'école_
about Chourineur which contains the same recognition and cannot he the
effect of his having been blinded, since it was made earlier. In talking
to Rudolph alone, the _maître d'école_ said about Chourineur:

“Besides, he is not capable of betraying a friend. No, there’s something
good in him ... he has always had strange ideas.”

This would seem to do away with Herr Szeliga’s moral miracle. Now we
shall see the _real_ results of Rudolph’s Critical cure.

We next meet the _maître d'école_ as he is going with a woman called
Chouette to Bouqueval farm to play a foul trick on Fleur de Marie. The
thought that dominates him is, of course, the thought of _revenge_ on
Rudolph. But the only way he knows of wreaking vengeance on him is
metaphysically, by thinking and hatching “_evil_” to spite him.

“_He has taken away my sight but not the thought of evil_.”

He tells Chouette why he had sent for her:

“I was bored all alone with those honest people.”

When Eugène Sue satisfies his monkish, bestial lust in the
_self-humiliation_ of man to the extent of making the _maître_ _d'école_
implore on his knees the old hag Chouette and the little imp Tortillard
not to abandon him, the great moralist forgets that that is the height
of diabolical satisfaction for Chouette. Just as Rudolph, precisely by
the _violent_ _act_ of _blinding_ the criminal, proved to him the power
of _physical force,_ which he wants to show him is insignificant, so
Eugène Sue now teaches the _maître d'école_ really to recognise the full
power of the _senses._ He teaches him to understand that without it man
is _unmanned_ and becomes a helpless object of mockery for children. He
convinces him that the world deserved his crimes, for he had only to
lose his sight to be ill-treated by it. He robs him of his last human
illusion, for so far the _maître d'école_ believed in Chouette’s
attachment to him. He had said to Rudolph: “She would let herself be
thrown into the fire for me.” Eugène Sue, on the other hand, has the
satisfaction of hearing the _maître d'école_ cry out in the depths of
despair:

“_Mon dieu! Mon dieu! Mon dieu!_”

He has learnt to “_pray_"! In this “appel _involontaire_ de la
commisération divine,” Eugène Sue sees “_quelque chose de
providentiel”._ [spontaneous appeal for divine mercy ... something
providential]

The first result of Rudolph’s Criticism is this _spontaneous prayer_. It
is followed immediately by an involuntary _atonement_ at Bouqueval farm,
where the ghosts of those whom the _maître d'école_ murdered appear to
him in a dream.

We shall not give a detailed description of this dream. We next find the
Critically reformed _maître d'école_ fettered in the cellar of the “Bras
rouge”, half devoured by rats, half starving and half insane as a result
of being tortured by Chouette and Tortillard, and roaring like a beast.
Tortillard had delivered Chouette to him. Let us watch the treatment he
inflicts on her. He _copies_ the hero _Rudolph_ not only outwardly, by
scratching out Chouette’s eyes, but _morally_ too by repeating Rudolph’s
hypocrisy and embellishing his cruel treatment with pious phrases. As
soon as the _maître d'école_ has Chouette in his power he gives vent to
“_une joie effrayante_”, [terrifying joy] and his voice trembles with
rage.

“You realise that I do not want to get it over at once.... Torture for
torture.... I must have a long talk with you before killing you.... It
is going to be terrible for you. First of all, you see ... since that
dream at Bouqueval farm which brought all our crimes back before me,
since that dream which nearly drove me mad ... and which will drive me
mad ... a strange change has come over me.... I have become horrified at
my past cruelty.... At first I would not let you torture the songstress
[Fleur de Marie], but that was nothing.... By bringing me to this cellar
and making me suffer cold and hunger.... you left me to the terror of my
own thoughts.... Oh, you don’t know what it is to be alone.... isolation
purified me. I should not have thought it possible ... a proof that I am
perhaps less of a blackguard than before ... what an infinite joy I feel
to have you in my power, you monster ... not in order to revenge myself
but ... to avenge our victims.... Yes, I shall have done my duty when I
have punished my accomplice with my own hand I am now horrified at my
past murders, and yet ... don’t you find it strange? it is without fear
and quite calmly that I am going to commit a terrible murder on you,
with terrible refinements ... tell me, tell me ... do you understand
that?”

In those few words the _maître d'école_ goes through a whole gamut of
_moral casuistry_.

His first words are a _frank_ expression of his desire for vengeance. He
wants to give torture for torture. He wants to murder Chouette and he
wants to prolong her agony by a long sermon. And — delightful
sophistry!-the speech with which he tortures her is a sermon on morals.
He asserts that his dream at Bouqueval has improved him. At the same
time he reveals the real effect of the dream by admitting that it almost
drove him mad and that it will actually do so. He gives as a proof of
his reform that he prevented Fleur de Marie from being tortured. Eugène
Sue’s personages -earlier Chourineur and now the _maître d'école_ — must
express, as the result of their thoughts, as the conscious. motive of
their actions, his own intention as a writer, which causes him to make
them behave in a certain way and no other. They must continually say: I
have reformed myself ‘in this, in that, etc. Since their life has no
real content, their words must give vigorous tones to insignificant
features like the protection of Fleur de Marie.

Having reported the salutary effect of his Bouqueval dream, the _maître
d'école_ must explain why Eugène Sue had him locked up in a cellar. He
must find the novelist’s procedure reasonable. He must say to Chouette:
by locking me up in a cellar, causing me to be gnawed by rats and to
suffer hunger and thirst, you have completed my reform. Solitude has
Purified me.

The beastly roar, the ‘wild fury, the terrible lust for vengeance with
which the _maître d'école_ welcomes Chouette are in complete
contradiction to this moralising talk. They betray what kind of thoughts
occupied him in his dungeon.

The _maître d'école_ himself seems to realise this, but being a Critical
moralist, he will know how to reconcile the contradictions.

He declares that the “infinite joy” of having Chouette in his power is
precisely a sign of his reform, for his lust for vengeance is not a
natural one but a _moral_ one. He wants to avenge, not himself, but the
common _victims_ of Chouette and himself. If he murders her, he does not
commit _murder_, he fulfils a _duty_. He does not _avenge_ himself on
her, he _punishes_ his accomplice like an impartial judge. He shudders
at his past murders and, nevertheless, marvelling at his own casuistry,
he asks Chouette: “Don’t you find it strange? Without fear and quite
calmly I am going to kill you.” On moral grounds that he does not
reveal, he gloats at the same time over the picture of the murder that
he is going to commit, as being _terrible murder ... murder with
terrible refinements._

It is in accord with the character of the _maître d'école_ that he
should murder Chouette, especially after the cruelty with which she
treated him. But that he should commit murder on moral grounds, that he
should give a moral interpretation to his savage pleasure in the
_terrible murder_ and the _terrible refinements_ that he should show his
remorse for the past murders precisely by committing a fresh one, that
from a simple murderer he should become _a murderer in a double sense,_
a _moral murderer_ — all this is the glorious result of Rudolph’s
Critical cure.

Chouette tries to get away from the _maître d'école._ He notices it and
holds her fast.

“Keep still, Chouette, I must finish explaining to you how I gradually
came to repentance.... This revelation will be hateful to you ... and it
will also show you how pitiless I must be in the vengeance I want to
wreak on you in the name of our victims.... I must hurry.... The joy of
having you here in my hands makes the blood pound in my veins.... I
shall have time to make the approach of your death terrifying to you by
forcing you to listen to me.... I am blind ... and my thoughts take a
shape, a body, such that they incessantly present to me visibly, almost
palpably ... the features of my victims.... The ideas are reflected
almost materially in my brain. When repentance is linked with an
atonement of terrifying severity, an atonement that changes our life
into a long sleeplessness filled with hallucinations of revenge or
desperate reflections ... then, perhaps, the pardon of men follows
remorse and atonement.”

The _maître d'école_ continues with his hypocrisy which every minute
betrays itself as such. Chouette must hear how he came by degrees to
repentance. This revelation will be hateful to her, for it will prove
that it is his _duty_ to take a pitiless revenge on her, not in his own
name, but in the name of their common victims. Suddenly the _maître
d'école_ interrupts his didactic lecture. He must, he says, “hurry” with
his lecture, for the pleasure of having her in his hands makes the blood
pound in his veins; that is a moral reason for cutting the lecture
short! Then he calms his blood again. The long time that he takes in
preaching her a moral sermon is not wasted for his revenge. It will
“make the approach of death terrifying” for her. That is a different
moral reason, one for protracting his sermon! And having such moral
reasons he can safely resume his moral text where he left off.

The _maître d'école_ describes correctly the condition to which
isolation from the outer world reduces a man. For one to whom the
_sensuously perceptible world_ becomes a _mere idea_, for him mere ideas
are transformed into _sensuously perceptible beings_. The figments of
his brain assume corporeal form. A world of tangible, palpable ghosts is
begotten within his mind. That is the secret of all pious visions and at
the same time it is the general form of insanity. When the _maître
d'école_ repeats Rudolph’s words about the “power of repentance and
atonement linked with terrible torments”, he does so in a state of
semi-madness, thus proving in fact the connection between Christian
consciousness of sin and insanity. Similarly, when the _maître d'école_
considers the transformation of _life_ into a _night of dream_ filled
with ghosts as the real result of repentance and atonement, he is
expressing the true mystery of pure Criticism and of Christian reform,
which consists in changing man into a ghost and his life into a life of
dream.

At this point Eugène Sue realises how the _salutary thoughts_ which he
makes the blind robber prate after Rudolph will be made ridiculous by
the robber’s treatment of Chouette. That is why he makes the _maître
d'école_ say:

“The salutary influence of these thoughts is such that my rage is
appeased."'

So the _maître d'école_ now admits that his moral wrath was nothing but
_profane rage_.

“I lack courage ... strength ... will to kill you.... No, it is not for
me to shed Your blood ... it would be ... murder.... Excusable murder,
perhaps, but murder all the same.”

Chouette wounds the _maître d'école_ with a dagger just in time. Eugène
Sue can now let him kill her without any further moral casuistry.

“He uttered a cry of pain ... his fierce passion of vengeance, of rage
and of bloodthirsty instinct, suddenly aroused and exacerbated by this
attack, had a sudden and terrible outburst in which his already badly
shaken reason was shattered.... Viper! I have felt your fang ... you
will be _sightless as_ I am.”

And he scratches her eyes out.

When the nature of the _maître d'école,_ which has been only
hypocritically, sophistically disguised, only ascetically repressed by
Rudolph’s cure, breaks out, the _outburst_ is all the more violent and
terrifying. We must be grateful to Eugène Sue for his admission that the
reason of the _maître d'école_ was badly shaken by all the events which
Rudolph has prepared.

“The last spark of his reason was extinguished in that cry of terror, in
that cry of a damned soul” (he sees the ghosts of his murdered victims)
“... the _maître d'école_ rages and roars like a _frenzied_ _beast_....
He tortures Chouette to death...

Herr Szeliga mutters under his breath:

“With the _maître d'école_ there cannot be such a _swift_” (!) “and
_fortunate_” (!) “_transformation_” (!) “as with Schurimann.”

Just as Rudolph sends Fleur de Marie into a convent, he makes the
_maître d'école_ an inmate of the _Bicêtre_ asylum. He has paralysed his
_spiritual_ as well as his physical strength. And rightly. For the
_maître d'école_ sinned with his spiritual as well as his physical
strength, and according to Rudolph’s penal theory the _sinning forces_
must be annihilated.

But Eugène Sue has not yet consummated the “repentance and atonement
linked with a terrible revenge”. The _maître d'école_ recovers his
reason, but fearing to be delivered to justice he remains in _Bicêtre_
and _pretends_ to be mad. Monsieur Sue forgets that “every word he said
was to be a _prayer_”, whereas finally it is much more like the
inarticulate howling and raving of a madman. Or does Monsieur Sue
perhaps ironically put these manifestations of life on the same level as
praying?

The idea underlying the punishment that Rudolph carried out in blinding
the _maître d'école_ — the isolation of the man and his soul from the
outer world, the combination of legal punishment with theological
torture — finds its ultimate expression in _solitary confinement_. That
is why Monsieur Sue glorifies this system.

“How many centuries had to pass before it was realised that there is
only one means of overcoming the rapidly spreading leprosy” (i.e., the
corruption of morals in prisons) “which is threatening the body of
society: isolation.”

Monsieur Sue shares the opinion of the worthy people who explain the
spread of crime by the organisation of prisons. To remove the criminal
from bad society he is left to his own society.

Eugène Sue says:

“I should consider myself lucky if my weak voice could he heard among
all those which so rightly and so insistently demand the _complete_ and
_absolute_ application of solitary confinement.”

Monsieur Sue’s wish has been only _partially_ fulfilled. In the debates
on solitary confinement in the Chamber of Deputies this year, even the
official supporters of that system had to acknowledge that it leads
sooner or later to insanity in the criminal. All sentences of
imprisonment for more than ten years had therefore to be converted into
deportation.

Had Messieurs Tocqueville and Beaumont studied Eugène Sue’s novel
thoroughly they would certainly have secured complete and absolute
application of solitary confinement.

If Eugène Sue deprives criminals with a sane mind of society in order to
make them insane, he gives insane persons society to make them sane.

“Experience proves that isolation is as fatal for the insane as it is
salutary for imprisoned criminals.”

If Monsieur Sue and his Critical hero Rudolph have not made law poorer
by any mystery, whether through the _Catholic penal theory_ or the
_Methodist solitary confinement_, they have, on the other hand, enriched
medicine with new mysteries, and after all, it is just as much of a
service to _discover new_ mysteries as to _disclose old_ ones. In its
report on the blinding of the _maître d'école_, Critical Criticism fully
agrees with Monsieur Sue:

“When he is told he is deprived of the light of his eyes he does not
even believe it.”

The _maître d'école_ could not believe in the loss of his sight because
in reality he could still see. Monsieur Sue is describing a new kind of
cataract and is reporting a real mystery for mass-type, un-Critical
_ophthalmology_.

The _pupil_ is _white_ after the operation, so it is a case of _cataract
of the crystalline lens_. So far, this could, of course, he caused by
injury to the envelope of the lens without causing much pain, though not
entirely without pain. But as doctors achieve this result only by
natural, not by _Critical_ means, the only resort was to wait until
inflammation set in after the injury and the exudation dimmed the lens.

A still greater _miracle_ and greater _mystery_ befall the _maître
d'école_ in the third chapter of the third book.

The man who has been blinded _sees_ again,

“Chouette, the _maître d'école_ and Tortillard saw the priest and Fleur
de Marie.”

If we do not interpret this restoration of the _maître d'école’s_
ability to see as an author’s miracle after the method of the _Kritik
der Synoptiker_, the _maître d'école_ must have had his cataract
operated on again. Later he is blind again. So he used his eyes too soon
and the irritation of the light caused inflammation which ended in
paralysis of the _retina_ and incurable _amaurosis_. It is another
_mystery_ for un-Critical ophthalmology that this process takes place
here in a single second.

b) Reward and Punishment. Double Justice (with a Table)

The hero Rudolph reveals a new theory to keep society upright by
_rewarding the good_ and _punishing the wicked_. Un-Critically
considered, this theory is nothing but the theory of society as it is
today. How little lacking it is in rewards for the good and punishments
for the wicked! Compared with this revealed mystery, how un-Critical is
the mass-type Communist _Owen_, who sees in punishment and reward the
consecration of differences in social rank and the complete expression
of a servile abasement.

It could be considered as a new revelation that Eugène Sue makes rewards
derive from the judiciary — from a new appendix to the Penal Code — and
not satisfied with _one_ jurisdiction he invents a _second_.
Unfortunately this revealed mystery, too, is the repetition of an old
theory expounded in detail by _Bentham_ in his work already mentioned
[Théorie des peines et des récompenses]. On the other hand, we cannot
deny Monsieur Eugène Sue the honour of having motivated and developed
Bentham’s suggestion in an incomparably more Critical way than the
latter. Whereas the mass-type Englishman keeps his feet on the ground,
Sue’s deduction rises to the Critical region of the heavens. His
argument is as follows:

“The supposed effects of heavenly wrath are materialised to deter the
wicked. Why should not the effect of the divine reward of the good be
similarly materialised and anticipated on earth?”

In the _un-Critical_ view it is the other way round: the heavenly
criminal theory has only idealised the earthly theory, just as divine
reward is only an idealisation of human wage service. It is absolutely
necessary that society should not reward all good people so that divine
justice will have some advantage over human justice.

In depicting his Critical rewarding justice, Monsieur Sue gives an
example of the _feminine dogmatism_ that must have a formula and forms
it according to the categories of _what exists_”, dogmatism which was
censured with all the “tranquillity of knowledge” by Herr Edgar in Flora
Tristan. For each point of the present _penal code_, which he retains,
Monsieur Sue projects the addition of a counterpart in a _reward code_
copied from it to the last detail. For easier survey we shall give his
description of the complementary pairs in tabular form:

Table of Critically Complete Justice

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
| Existing Justice                  | Critically Supplementing Justice  |
|                                   |                                   |
| Name: Criminal Justice            | Name: Virtuous Justice            |
|                                   |                                   |
| Description: holds in its hand a  | Description: holds in its hand a  |
| _sword_ to shorten the wicked by  | crown to raise the good by a      |
| a head.                           | head.                             |
|                                   |                                   |
| Purpose: Punishment of the wicked | Purpose: Reward of the good, free |
| — imprisonment, infamy,           | board, honour, maintenance of     |
| deprivation of life. The people   | life.                             |
| is notified of the terrible       | The people is notified of the     |
| chastisements for the wicked.     | brilliant triumphs for the good.  |
|                                   |                                   |
| Means of discovering the          | Means of discovering the Good_:   |
| wicked_:_ Police spying,          | Espionnage de vertu, mouchards_   |
| _mouchards_, to keep watch over   | to keep watch over the virtuous.  |
| the wicked.                       |                                   |
|                                   | Method of ascertaining whether    |
| Method of ascertaining whether    | someone is good_: Assises de la   |
| someone is wicked_: Les assists   | vertu,_ virtue assizes. The       |
| du crime_, criminal assizes. The  | public ministry points out and    |
| public ministry points out and    | proclaims the noble deeds of the  |
| indicts the crimes of the accused | accused for public recognition.   |
| for public vengeance.             |                                   |
|                                   | Condition of the virtuous after   |
| Condition of the criminal after   | sentence: Under surveillance de   |
| sentence: Under _surveillance de  | la haute _charité morale_. Is fed |
| la haute police._ Is fed in       | at home. The state defrays        |
| prison. The state defrays         | expenses.                         |
| expenses.                         |                                   |
|                                   | Execution: Immediately opposite   |
| Execution: The criminal stands on | the scaffold of the criminal a    |
| the _scaffold._                   | _pedestal_ is erected on which    |
|                                   | the _grand homme de bien_ stands. |
|                                   | — _A pillory of virtue._          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Moved by the sight of this picture, Monsieur Sue exclaims:

“ Alas! It is a utopia! But suppose a society were organised in this
way!”

That would be the _Critical organisation of society._ We must defend
this organisation against Eugène Sue’s reproach that up to now it has
remained a utopia. Sue has again forgotten the “_Virtue Prize_” which is
awarded every year in Paris and which he himself mentions. This prize is
even organised in duplicate: the material _prix Montyon_ for noble acts
of men and women, and the _prix rosière_ for girls of highest morality.
There is even the _wreath_ of roses demanded by Eugène Sue.

As far as _espionnage de vertu_ and the _surveillance de haute charité
morale_ are concerned, they were organised long ago by the Jesuits.
Moreover, the _Journal des Débats, Siècle, Petites affiches de Paris_,
etc., point out and proclaim the virtues, noble acts and merits of all
the Paris stockjobbers daily and at cost price not counting the pointing
out and proclamation of political noble acts, for which each party has
its own organ.

Old Voss remarked long ago that Homer is better than his gods. The
“revealed mystery of all mysteries”, Rudolph, can therefore be made
responsible for Eugène Sue’s ideas.

In addition, Herr _Szeliga_ reports:

“Besides, the passages in which Eugène Sue interrupts the narration and
introduces or concludes episodes are very numerous, and all are
_Critical_.”

c) Abolition of Degeneracy Within Civilisation and of Rightlessness in the State

The juridical _preventive means_ for the abolition of crime and hence of
degeneracy within civilisation consists in the

“protective guardianship assumed by the state over the children of
executed criminals or of those condemned to a life sentence”.

Sue wants to organise the subdivision of crime in a more liberal way. No
family should any longer have a hereditary privilege to crime; free
competition in crime should triumph over monopoly.

Monsieur Sue abolishes “rightlessness in the state” by reforming the
section of the _Code pénal_ on _abus de confiance_ [breach of trust],
and especially by the institution of _paid lawyers for the poor_. He
finds that in Piedmont, Holland, etc., where there are lawyers for the
poor, rightlessness in the state has been abolished. The only failing of
French legislation is that it does not provide for payment of lawyers
for the poor, has no lawyers restricted to serving the poor, and makes
the legal limits of poverty too narrow. As if rightlessness did not
begin in the very lawsuit itself, and as if it had not already been
known for a long time in France that the law gives nothing, but only
sanctions what exists. The already trivial differentiation between
_droit_ and _fait_ seems still to be a _mystère de Paris_ for the
Critical novelist.

If we add to the Critical revelation of the mysteries of law the great
reforms which Eugène Sue wants to institute in respect of _huissiers_
[bailiffs], we shall understand the Paris Journal _Satan_. There we see
the residents of a district in the city write to the “_grand réformateur
à tant la ligne_” [great reformer at so much a line], that there is no
gaslight yet in their streets. Monsieur Sue replies that he will deal
with this shortcoming in the sixth volume of his _Juif errant_ [the
Wandering Jew]. Another part of the city complains of the shortcomings
of preliminary education. He promises a preliminary education reform for
that district of the city in the tenth volume of _Juif errant_.

4) The Revealed Mystery of The “Standpoint”

“Rudolph does not remain at his lofty” (!) .._standpoint_ ... he does
not shirk the trouble of adopting by free choice the _standpoints_ on
the right and on the left, above and below” (_Szeliga_).

One of the principal mysteries of Critical Criticism is the
“_standpoint_” and _judgment from the standpoint of the standpoint_. For
Criticism every man, like every product of the spirit, is turned into a
standpoint.

Nothing is easier than to see through the mystery of the standpoint when
one has seen through the general mystery of Critical Criticism, that of
warming up old speculative trash.

First of all, let Criticism itself expound its theory of the
“standpoint” in the words of its patriarch, Herr _Bruno Bauer_.

“Science ... _never_ deals with a _given single individual_ or a _given
definite standpoint_ ... it will not fail, of course, _to do away with
the limitations of a standpoint_ if it is worth the trouble and if these
limitations have really general human significance; but it conceives
them as _pure category and determinations of selfconsciousness_ and
accordingly speaks only for those who have the courage to rise to the
_generality of self-consciousness,_ i.e., who do not wish with all their
strength to remain within those limitations” (_Anekdota_, t. II, p.
127).
[B. Bauer, Leiden und Freuden des theologischen Bewusstseins]

The _mystery_ of this courage of Bauer’s is _Hegel’s_ _Phänomenologie_.
Because Hegel here substitutes _self-consciousness_ for _man_, the _most
varied_ manifestations of human reality appear only as _definite_ forms,
as _determinateness of self-consciousness._ But mere determinateness of
self-consciousness is a “_pure category_”, a mere “thought”, which I can
consequently also transcend in “pure” thought and overcome through pure
thought. In Hegel’s _Phänomenologie_ the _material_, _sensuously
perceptible, objective_ foundations of the various estranged forms of
human self-consciousness are allowed to remain. The whole destructive
work results in the _most conservative philosophy_ because it thinks it
has overcome the _objective world_, the sensuously perceptible real
world, by transforming it into a “Thing of Thought”, a mere
_determinateness of self-consciousness,_ and can therefore also dissolve
its opponent, which has become _ethereal_, in the “_ether of pure
thought’._ The _Phänomenologie_ is therefore quite consistent in that it
ends by replacing human reality by “_absolute knowledge_” — _knowledge_,
because this is the only mode of existence of self-consciousness, and
because selfconsciousness is considered the only mode of existence of
man — _absolute_ knowledge for the very reason that selfconsciousness
knows _only itself_ and is no longer disturbed by any objective world.
Hegel makes man the _man of self-consciousness_ instead of making
self-consciousness the _self-consciousness of man_, of real man, i.e.,
of man living also in a real, objective world and determined by that
world. He stands the world _on_ _its head_ and can therefore _in_ _his
head_ also dissolve all limitations, which nevertheless remain in
existence _for bad sensuousness_, for _real_ man. Moreover, everything
that betrays the _limitations of general self-consciousness_ — all
sensuousness, reality, individuality of men and of their world — is
necessarily held by him to be a limit. The whole of the _Phänomenologie_
is intended to prove that _self-consciousness_ is the _only reality_ and
_all reality_.

Herr Bauer has recently re-christened absolute knowledge _Criticism_,
and given the more profane sounding name _standpoint_ to the
determinateness of self-consciousness. In the _Anekdota_ both names are
still to be found side by side, and standpoint is still explained as the
determinateness of self-consciousness.

Since the “_religious world as such_” exists only as the world of
_self-consciousness,_ the Critical Critic — the theologian _ex professo_
— cannot by any means entertain the thought that there is a world in
which _consciousness_ and _being_ are distinct; a world which continues
to exist when I merely abolish its existence in thought, its existence
as a category or as a standpoint; i.e., when I modify my own subjective
consciousness without altering the objective reality in a really
objective way, that is to say, without altering my own _objective_
reality and that of other men. Hence the speculative _mystical identity_
of _being_ and _thinking_ is repeated in Criticism as the equally
mystical identity of _practice_ and _theory_. That is why Criticism is
so vexed with practice which wants to be something distinct from theory,
and with theory which wants to be something other than the dissolution
of a definite _category_ in the “_boundless generality of
self-consciousness_”. Its own theory is confined to stating that
everything determinate is an opposite of the boundless generality of
self-consciousness and is, therefore, of no significance; for example,
the state, private property, etc. It must be shown, on the contrary, how
the state, private property, etc., turn human beings into abstractions,
or are products of abstract man, instead of being the reality of
individual, concrete human beings.

Finally, it goes without saying that whereas Hegel’s _Phänomenologie_,
in spite of its speculative original sin, gives in many instances the
elements of a true description of human relations, Herr Bruno and Co.,
on the other hand, provide only an empty caricature, a caricature which
is satisfied with deriving any determinateness out of a product of the
spirit or even out of real relations and movements, changing this
determinateness into a determinateness of thought, into a _category_,
and making out that this category is the _standpoint_ of the product, of
the relation and the movement, in order then to be able to look down on
this determinateness triumphantly with old-man’s wisdom from the
standpoint of abstraction, of the general category and of general
self-consciousness.

Just as in Rudolph’s opinion all human beings maintain the standpoint of
good or bad and are judged by these two immutable conceptions, so for
Herr Bauer and Co. all human beings adopt the standpoint of Criticism or
that of the _Mass._ But both turn _real human beings_ into _abstract
standpoints_.

5) Revelation of The Mystery of the Utilisation of Human Impulses, Or Clémence D'Harville

So far Rudolph has been unable to do more than reward the good and
punish the wicked in his own way. We shall now see an example of how he
makes the passions useful and “gives the good natural disposition of
Clémence d'Harville an appropriate development”.

“Rudolph,” says Herr Szeliga, “draws her attention to the entertaining
aspect of charity, a thought which testifies to a knowledge of human
beings that can only arise in the soul of Rudolph after it has been
through trial.”

The expressions which Rudolph uses in his conversation with Clémence:

“To make attractive”, “to utilise natural _taste_”, _“to_ regulate
intrigue”, “to utilise _the_ propensity to dissimulation and craft”, “to
change imperious, inexorable instincts into noble qualities” _etc.,_

these expressions just as ‘ much as the _impulses_ themselves, which are
mostly attributed here to woman’s nature, betray the secret source of
Rudolph’s wisdom — _Fourier_. He has come across some popular
presentation of Fourier’s theory.

The _application_ is again just as much Rudolph’s Critical own as is the
exposition of Bentham’s theory given above.

It is not in charity _as such_ that the young marquise is to find the
satisfaction of her essential human nature, a human content and purpose
of her activity, and hence entertainment. Charity offers rather only the
external occasion, only the _pretext_, only the _material_, for a kind
of entertainment that could just as well use any other material as its
content. Misery is exploited consciously to procure the charitable
person “the piquancy of a novel, the satisfaction of curiosity,
adventure, disguise, enjoyment of his or her own excellence, violent
nervous excitement”, and the like.

Rudolph has thereby unconsciously expressed the mystery which was
revealed long ago, that human misery itself, the infinite abjectness
which is obliged to receive alms, must serve the aristocracy of money
and education as a _plaything_ to satisfy its self-love, tickle its
arrogance and amuse it.

The numerous charitable associations in Germany, the numerous charitable
societies in France and the great number of charitable quixotic
societies in England, the concerts, balls, plays, meals for the poor,
and even the public subscriptions for victims of accidents, have no
other object. It seems then that along these lines charity, too, has
long been _organised_ as entertainment.

The sudden, unmotivated transformation of the marquise at the mere word
“_amusant_” makes us doubt the durability of her cure; or rather this
transformation is sudden and unmotivated only in appearance and is
caused only in appearance by the description of _charité_ as an
amusement. The marquise _loves_ Rudolph and Rudolph wants to disguise
himself _along with her_, to intrigue and to indulge in charitable
adventures. Later, when the marquise pays a charity visit to the prison
of Saint-Lazare, her jealousy of Fleur de Marie becomes apparent and out
of charity towards her jealousy she conceals from Rudolph the fact of
Marie’s detention. At the best, Rudolph has succeeded in teaching an
unhappy woman to play a silly comedy with unhappy beings. The mystery of
the _philanthropy_ he has hatched is betrayed by the Paris fop who
invites his partner to supper after the dance in the following words:

“Ah, Madame, it is not enough to have danced for the benefit of these
poor Poles.... Let us he philanthropy to the end.... Let us have supper
now for the benefit _of the_ poor!”

6) Revelation of the Mystery of the Emancipation of Women, Or Louise Morel

On the occasion of the arrest of _Louise Morel_, Rudolph indulges in
reflections which he sums up as follows:

“The master often ruins the maid, either by fear, surprise or other use
of the opportunities provided by the nature of _the servants’
condition_. He reduces her to misery, shame and crime. The _law is not
concerned_ with this.... The criminal who has in fact driven a girl to
infanticide is not _punished_.”

Rudolph’s reflections do not go so far as to make the _servants’
condition_ the object of his most gracious Criticism. Being a _petty_
rulers he is a _great_ patroniser of servants’ conditions. Still less
does he go so far as to understand that the general position of women in
modern society is inhuman. Faithful in all respects to his previous
theory, he deplores only that there is no _law which punishes_ a seducer
and links repentance and atonement with terrible chastisement.

Rudolph has only to take a look at the existing legislation in other
countries. _English_ laws fulfil all his wishes. In their delicacy,
which _Blackstone_ so highly praises, they go so far as to declare it a
_felony_ to seduce even a prostitute.

Herr Szeliga exclaims with a _flourish_:

“_So_” (!) — “_thinks_” (!) — “_Rudolph_” (!) — “and now compare _these
thoughts_ with your _fantasies_ about the _emancipation of woman_. The
act of this emancipation can be almost physically grasped from them, but
you are much too practical to start with, and that is why your attempts
have failed so often.”

In any case we must thank Herr Szeliga for revealing the mystery that an
act can be almost physically grasped from thoughts. As for his
ridiculous comparison of Rudolph with men who taught the emancipation of
woman, compare Rudolph’s thoughts with the following “fantasies” of
_Fourier_.

“Adultery, seduction, are a credit to the seducer, are good tone....
But, poor girl! Infanticide! What a crime! If she prizes her honour she
must efface all traces of dishonour. But if she sacrifices her child to
the prejudices of the world her ignominy is all the greater and she is a
victim of the prejudices of the law.... That is the vicious circle which
every civilised mechanism describes.”

“Is not the young daughter a ware held up for sale to the first bidder
who wishes to obtain exclusive ownership of her?... just as in grammar
two negations are the equivalent of an affirmation, we can say that in
the marriage trade two prostitutions are the equivalent of virtue.”

“The change in a historical epoch can always be determined by women’s
progress towards freedom, because here, in the relation of woman to man,
of the weak to the strong, the victory of human nature over brutality is
most evident. The degree of emancipation of woman is the natural measure
of general emancipation.”

“The humiliation of the female sex is an essential feature of
civilisation as well as of barbarism. The only difference is that the
civilised system raises every vice that barbarism practises in a simple
form to a compound, equivocal, ambiguous, hypocritical mode of
existence.... No one is punished more severely for keeping woman in
slavery than man himself” (_Fourier_). ^([67])

It is superfluous to contrast Rudolph’s thoughts with Fourier’s masterly
characterisation of _marriage_, or with the works of the materialist
section of French communism.^([68])

The most pitiful off-scourings of socialist literature, a sample of
which is to be found in this novelist, reveal “mysteries” still unknown
to Critical Criticism.

7) Revelation of Political Economic Mysteries

a) Theoretical Revelation of Political Economic Mysteries

_First_ revelation: Wealth often leads to waste, waste to ruin.

_Second revelation_: The above-mentioned effects of wealth arise from a
lack of instruction in rich youth.

_Third revelation_: _Inheritance_ and _private property_ are and _must_
be inviolable and sacred.

_Fourth revelation_: The rich man is _morally_ responsible to the
workers for the way he uses his fortune. A large fortune is a hereditary
deposit — a _feudal tenement_ — entrusted to clever, firm, skilful and
magnanimous hands, which are at the same time charged with making it
fruitful and using it in such a way that everything which has the _good
luck_ to be within the range of the dazzling and wholesome radiation of
that large fortune is fructified, vitalised and improved.

_Fifth revelation_: The state must give inexperienced rich youth the
rudiments of _individual economy_. It must give a moral character to
riches.

_Sixth revelation_: Finally, the state must tackle the vast question of
_organisation of labour_. It must give the wholesome example of the
_association of capitals and labour_, of an association which is honest,
intelligent and fair, which ensures the well-being of the _worker
without_ prejudice to the _fortune of the rich_, which establishes links
of sympathy and gratitude _between_ these _two classes_ and thus ensures
tranquillity in the state _for ever_.

Since the state at present does not yet accept this theory _Rudolph_
himself gives some practical examples. They reveal the mystery that the
most generally known _economic relations_ are still ..mysteries” for
Monsieur Sue, Monsieur Rudolph and Critical Criticism.

b) “The Bank for the Poor”

Rudolph institutes a _Bank for the Poor_. The statute of this _Critical_
Bank for the Poor is as follows:

It must give support during periods of unemployment to honest workers
with families. It must replace alms and pawnshops. It has at its
disposal an annual income of 12,000 francs and distributes interest-free
assistance loans of 20 to 40 francs. At first it extends its activity
only to the _seventh arrondissement_ of Paris, where most of the workers
live. Working men and women applying for relief must have a certificate
from their last employer vouching for their good behaviour and giving
the cause and date of the interruption of work. These loans are to be
paid off in monthly instalments of one-sixth or one-twelfth of the sum
at the choice of the borrower, counting from the day on which he finds
employment again. The loan is guaranteed by a the borrower’s word of
honour. Moreover, the latter’s _parole jurée_ [sworn sword] must be
guaranteed by two other workers.

As the Critical purpose of the Bank for the Poor is to remedy one of the
most grievous misfortunes in the life of the worker — _interruption in
employment_ — assistance would be given only to unemployed manual
workers. Monsieur Germain, the manager of this institution, draws a
yearly salary of 10,000 francs.

Let us now cast a mass-type glance at the practice of Critical political
economy. The annual income is 12,000 francs. The amount loaned per
person is from 20 to 40 francs, hence an average of 30 francs. The
number of workers in the seventh arrondissement who are officially
recognised as “needy” is at least 4,000. Hence, in a year only 400, or
one-tenth, of the neediest workers in the seventh _arrondissement_ can
receive relief. If we estimate the _average length_ of unemployment in
Paris at 4 months, i.e., 16 weeks, we shall be considerably below the
actual figure. Thirty francs divided over 16 weeks gives somewhat less
than 37 sous and 3 centimes a week, not even 27 centimes a day. The
daily expense on _one prisoner_ in France is on the average a little
over 47 centimes, somewhat over 30 centimes being spent on food alone.
But the worker to whom Monsieur Rudolph pays relief has a family. Let us
take the average family as consisting of man, wife and only two
children; that means that 27 centimes must be divided among four
persons. From this we must deduct rent — a minimum of 15 centimes a day
— so that 12 centimes remain. The average amount of _bread_ eaten by a
_single_ prisoner costs about 14 centimes. Therefore, even disregarding
all other needs, the worker and his family will not be able to buy even
a quarter of the bread they need with the help obtained from the
Critical Bank for the Poor. They will certainly starve if they do not
resort to the means that the bank is intended to obviate — the pawnshop,
begging, thieving and prostitution.

The manager of the Bank for the Poor, on the other hand, is all the more
brilliantly provided for by the man of ruthless Criticism. The income he
administers is 12,000 francs, his salary is 10,000. The management
therefore costs 85 per cent of the total, nearly three times as much as
the mass-type administration of poor relief in Paris, which costs about
17 per cent of the total.

Let us suppose for a moment that the assistance that the Bank for the
Poor provides is real, not just illusory. In that case the institution
of the revealed mystery of all mysteries rests on the illusion that only
a different _distribution_ of wages is required to enable the workers to
live through the year.

Speaking in the prosaic sense, the income of 7,500,000 French workers
averages no more than 91 francs per head, that of another 7,500,000 is
only 120 francs per head; hence for at least 15,000,000 it is less than
is absolutely necessary for life.

The idea of the Critical Bank for the Poor, if it is rationally
conceived, amounts to this: during the time the worker is employed as
much will be deducted from his wages as he needs for his living during
unemployment. It comes to the same thing whether I advance him a certain
sum during his unemployment and he gives it back when he has employment,
or he gives up a certain sum when he has employment and I give it back
to him when he is unemployed. In either case he gives me when he is
working what he gets from me when he is unemployed.

Thus, the “Pure” _Bank for the Poor_ differs from the mass-type
_savings-banks_ only in two very original, very Critical qualities. The
first is that the Bank for the Poor lends money “à fonds perdus” [not to
be repaid], on the senseless assumption that the worker could pay back
if he wanted to and that he would always want to pay back if he could.
The second is that it pays no _interest_ on the sum put aside by the
worker. As this sum is given the form of an advance, the Bank for the
Poor thinks it is doing the worker a favour by not charging him any
interest.

The difference between the Critical Bank for the Poor and the mass-type
savings-banks is therefore that the worker loses his interest and the
Bank its capital.

c) Model Farm at Bouqueval

Rudolph founds a _model farm_ at _Bouqueval_. The choice of the place is
all the more fortunate as it preserves memories of feudal times. namely
of a _château seigneurial_ [feudal manor].

Each of the six men employed on this farm is paid 150 écus, or 450
francs a year, while the women get 60 écus, or 180 francs. Moreover they
get board and lodging free. The ordinary daily fare of the people at
Bouqueval consists of a “formidable” plate of ham, an equally formidable
plate of mutton and, finally, a no less massive piece of veal
supplemented by two kinds of winter salad, two large cheeses, potatoes,
cider, etc. Each of the six men does twice the work of the ordinary
French agricultural labourer.

As the total annual income produced by France, if divided equally, would
come to no more than 93 francs per person, and as the total number of
inhabitants employed directly in agriculture is two-thirds of the
population of France, it will be seen what a revolution the general
imitation of the German caliph’s model farm would cause not only in the
distribution, but also in the production of the national wealth.

According to what has been said, Rudolph achieved this enormous increase
in production solely by making each labourer work twice as much and eat
six times as much as before.

Since the French peasant is very industrious, labourers who work twice
as much must be _superhuman athletes_, as the “formidable” meat dishes
also seem to indicate. Hence we may assume that each of the six men eats
at least a pound of meat a day.

If all the meat produced in France were distributed equally there would
not be even a quarter of a pound per person per day. It is therefore
obvious what a revolution Rudolph’s example would cause in this respect
too. The agricultural population _alone_ would consume more meat than is
produced in France, so that as a result of this Critical reform France
would be left without any livestock.

The fifth part of the gross product which Rudolph, according to the
report of the manager of Bouqueval, Father Chatelain, allows the
labourers, in addition to the high wage and sumptuous board, is nothing
else than his _rent_. It is assumed that, on the average, after
deduction of all production costs and profit on the working capital,
one-fifth of the gross product remains for the French landowner, that is
to say, the ratio of the rent to the gross product is one to five.
Although it is beyond doubt that Rudolph decreases the profit on his
working capital beyond all proportion by increasing the expenditure for
the labourers beyond all proportion — according to Chaptal (_De
l'industrie française_, t. 1, p. 2 39) the average yearly income of the
French agricultural labourer is 120 francs — although Rudolph gives his
whole rent away to the labourers, Father Chatelain nevertheless reports
that the prince thereby increases his revenue and thus inspires
un-Critical landowners to farm in the same way.

The Bouqueval model farm is nothing but a fantastic illusion; its
_hidden fund_ is not the natural land of the Bouqueval estate, it is a
magic purse of Fortunatus that Rudolph has!

In this connection Critical Criticism exultantly declares:

“You can see from the _whole_ plan at a _first glance_ that it is _not a
utopia_.”

Only Critical Criticism can see at a first glance at a _Fortunatus’_
purse that it is not a utopia. The first glance of Criticism is — the
glance of “the evil eye"!

8) Rudolph, “The Revealed Mystery of All Mysteries”

The miraculous means by which Rudolph accomplishes all his redemptions
and miracle cures is not his fine words but his _ready money_. That is
what the moralists are like, says Fourier. You must be a millionaire to
he able to imitate their heroes.

_Morality_ is “_impuissance mise en action_” ["impotence in action” Ch.
Fourier, Théorie des quatre mouvement et des destinées générales, Part
II, Epilogue]. Every time it fights a vice it is defeated. And Rudolph
does not even rise to the standpoint of independent morality, which is
based at least on the consciousness of _human dignity_. His morality, on
the contrary, is based on the consciousness of human weakness. His is
the _theological_ morality. We have investigated in detail the heroic
feats that he accomplished with his fixed, Christian ideas, by which he
measures the world, with his “_charité_”, “_dévouement_”,
“_abnégation_”, “_repentir_”, “_bons_” and “_méchants_”, “_récompense_”
and “_punition_”, “_châtiments terribles_”, “_isolement_”, “_salut de
l'âme_” [charity, devotion, self-denial, repentance”, the good and the
wicked people, reward and punishment, terrible chastisements, isolation,
salvation of the soul] etc. We have proved that they are mere
_Eulenspiegel_ tricks. All that we still have to deal with here is the
personal character of Rudolph, the “revealed mystery of all mysteries”
or the revealed mystery of “_pure_ Criticism”.

The antithesis of “good” and “evil” confronts the Critical Hercules when
he is still a youth in two personifications, _Murph_ and _Polidori_,
both of them Rudolph’s teachers. The former educates him in good and is
“the _Good One_”. The latter educates him in evil and is “the _Evil
One_”. So that this conception should by no means be inferior in
triviality to similar conceptions in other novels, Murph, the
personification of “_the good_”, cannot be “_savant_” or “particularly
endowed intellectually”. But he is _honest_, _simple_, and _laconic_; he
feels himself great when he applies to evil such monosyllabic words as
“_foul_” or “_vile_”, and he has a _horreur_ of anything which is
_base._ To use Hegel’s expression, he honestly sets the melody of the
good and the true in an equality of tones, i.e., on _one note._

_Polidori_, on the contrary, is a prodigy of cleverness, knowledge and
education, and at the same time of the “most dangerous immorality”,
having, in particular, what Eugène Sue, as a member of the young pious
French bourgeoisie, could not forget — “_Le plus effrayant scepticisme_”
[the most frightful scepticism]. We can judge the spiritual energy and
education of Eugène Sue and his hero by their panic fear of scepticism.

Murph,” says Herr Szeliga, “is at the same time the perpetuated guilt of
January 13 [On this day, Rudolph, in a fit of anger, made an attempt on
the life of his father, but repented and gave the word to do good] and
the perpetual redemption of that guilt by his incomparable love and
self-sacrifice for the person of Rudolph.”

Just as Rudolph is the _deus ex machina_ and the mediator of the world,
so Murph, for his part, is the personal _deus ex machina_ and mediator
of Rudolph.

“Rudolph and the salvation of mankind, Rudolph and the realisation of
man’s essential perfections, are for Murph an inseparable unity, a unity
to which he dedicates himself not with the stupid dog-like devotion of
the slave, but knowingly and independently.”

So Murph is an enlightened, knowing and independent slave. Like every
prince’s valet, he sees in his master the salvation of mankind
personified. Graun flatters Murph with the words: “_intrépide garde du
corps_” [fearless bodyguard]. Rudolph himself calls him _modèle d'un
valet_ [model servant] and truly he is a _model servant_. Eugène Sue
tells us that Murph scrupulously addresses Rudolph as “Monseigneur” when
alone with him. In the presence of others he calls him _Monsieur_ with
his lips to keep his incognito, but “Monseigneur” with his heart.

“Murph helps to raise the veil from the mysteries, but only for
Rudolph’s sake. He helps in the work of destroying the power of
mystery.”

The denseness of the veil which conceals the simplest conditions of the
world from Murph can be seen from his conversation with the envoy Graun.
From the legal right of self-defence in case of emergency he concludes
that Rudolph, as _judge of the secret court_, was entitled to blind the
_maître d'école_, although the latter was in chains and “defenceless”.
His description of how Rudolph will tell of his “noble” actions before
the assizes, will make a display of eloquent phrases, and will let his
great heart pour forth, is worthy of a grammar-school boy who has just
read Schiller’s _Raüber_. The only mystery which Murph lets the world
solve is whether he blacked his face with coal-dust or black paint when
he played the _charbonnier_ [coal man].

“The angels shall come forth and sever the wicked from among the just”
(Mat. 13:49). “Tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that
doeth evil ... ; But glory, honour, and peace, to every man that worketh
good” (Rom. 2:9-10).

Rudolph makes himself one of those _angels_. He goes forth into the
world to sever the wicked from among the just, to punish the wicked and
reward the good. The conception of good and evil has sunk so deep into
his weak brain that he really believes in a corporeal Satan and wants to
catch the devil alive, as at one time Professor _Sack_ wanted to in
Bonn.^([69]) On the other hand, he tries to copy on a small scale the
opposite of the devil, _God_. He likes “_de jouer un peu le rôle de la
providence_” [to play the role of Providence a little]. Just as in
_reality_ _all_ differences become merged more and more in the
difference between _poor_ and _rich_, so _all_ aristocratic differences
become dissolved in _idea_ in the opposition between _good_ and _evil_.
This distinction is the last form that the aristocrat gives to his
prejudices. Rudolph regards himself as a good man and thinks that the
wicked exist to afford him the self-satisfaction of his own ‘
excellence. Let us consider this personification of “the good” a little
more closely.

Herr Rudolph indulges in charity and extravagance like the Caliph of
Baghdad in the Arabian Nights. He cannot possibly lead that kind of life
without sucking the blood out of his little principality in Germany to
the last drop like a vampire. As Monsieur Sue tells us, he would have
been one of the mediatised German princes. ^([70]) had he not been saved
from involuntary abdication by the protection of a French _marquis_.
This gives us an idea of the size of his territory. We can form a
further idea of how _Critically_ Rudolph appraises his _own situation_
by the fact that he, a minor German _Serenissimus_, thinks it necessary
to live semi-incognito in Paris in order not to attract attention. He
specially takes with him one of his _chancellors_ for the Critical
purpose of the latter representing for him “_le côté théâtral et puéril
du pouvoir souverain_” [the theatrical and childish side of sovereign
power], as though a minor German _Serenissimus_ needed another
representative of the theatrical and childish side of sovereign power
besides himself and his mirror. Rudolph has succeeded in imposing on his
suite the same _Critical self-delusion_. Thus his servant _Murph_ and
his envoy _Graun_ do not notice that the Parisian _homme d'affaires_
[household manager], Monsieur _Badinot_, makes fun of them when he
pretends to take their private instructions as matters of state and
sarcastically chatters about

“_occult relations that can exist between the most varying interests and
the destinies of empires_” “Yes,” says Rudolph’s envoy, “he has the
impudence to say to me sometimes: ‘How many complications unknown to the
people there are in the government of a state! Who would think, Herr
Baron, that the notes which I deliver to you doubtless have their
influence on the course of _European affairs_?'”

The envoy and Murph do not find it impudent that influence on European
affairs is ascribed to them, but that Badinot idealises his lowly
occupation in such a way.

Let us first recall a scene from _Rudolph’s_ domestic life. Rudolph
tells Murph “he was having moments of pride and bliss”. Immediately
afterwards he becomes furious because Murph will not answer a question
of his. “_Je vous ordonne de parier_.” [I order you to speak] Murph will
not let himself be ordered. Rudolph says: “_Je n'aime pas les
réticences_” [I do not like reticences] He forgets himself so far as to
be base enough to remind Murph that he _pays_ him for all his services.
He will not be calmed until Murph reminds him of January 13. Murph’s
servile nature reasserts itself after its momentary abeyance. He tears
out his “hair”, which he luckily has’ not got, and is desperate at
having been somewhat rude to his exalted master who calls him “a model
servant”, “his good old faithful Murph”.

After these samples of evil in him, Rudolph repeats his fixed ideas on
“good” and “evil” and reports the progress he is making in regard to the
good. He calls alms and compassion the chaste and pious consolers of his
wounded soul. It would be horrible, impious, a sacrilege, to prostitute
them to abject, unworthy beings. Of course alms and compassion are the
consolers of _his_ soul. That is why it would be a sacrilege to
desecrate them. It would be “to inspire doubt in God, and he who gives
must make people believe in Him”. To give alms to one abject is
unthinkable!

Rudolph considers every motion of his soul as infinitely important. That
is why he constantly observes and appraises them. Thus the simpleton
consoles himself as far as his outburst against Murph is concerned by
the fact that he was moved by Fleur de Marie. “I was moved to tears, and
I am accused of being _blasé_, hard and inflexible!” After thus proving
_his own goodness,_ he waxes furious over “_evil_”, over the wickedness
of Marie’s unknown mother, and says with the greatest possible solemnity
to Murph:

“_You know — some vengeances are very dear to me, some sufferings very
precious_”.

In speaking, he makes such diabolical grimaces that his faithful servant
cries out in fear: “Hélas, Monseigneur!” This great lord is like the
members of _Young England_, ^([71]) who also wish to reform the world,
perform noble deeds, and are subject to similar hysterical fits.

The explanation of the adventures and situations in which Rudolph finds
himself involved is to be found above all in Rudolph’s _adventurous
disposition_. He loves “the piquancy of novels, distractions,
adventures, disguise”., his “curiosity” is “insatiable”, he feels a
“need for vigorous, stimulating sensations”, he is “eager for _violent
nervous excitement_”.

This disposition of Rudolph is reinforced by his craze for _playing the
role of Providence_ and arranging the world according to his fixed
ideas.

His attitude to other persons is determined either by an abstract fixed
idea or by quite personal, fortuitous motives.

He frees the Negro doctor David and his beloved, for example, not
because of the direct human sympathy which they inspire, not to free
_them_, but to play _Providence_ to the slave-owner Willis and to punish
him for _not believing in God_. In the same way the _maître d'école_
seems to him a god-sent opportunity for _applying_ the penal theory that
he invented so long ago. Murph’s conversation with the envoy Graun
enables us from another aspect to see deeply into the purely personal
motives that determine Rudolph’s noble acts.

The prince’s interest in Fleur de Marie is based, as Murph says, “apart
from” the pity which the poor girl inspires, on the fact that the
daughter whose loss caused him such bitter grief would now be of the
same age. Rudolph’s sympathy for the Marquise d'Harville has, “apart
from” his philanthropic idiosyncrasies, the personal ground that without
the old Marquise d'Harville and his friendship with the Emperor
Alexander, Rudolph’s father would have been deleted from the line of
German sovereigns.

His kindness towards Madame George and his interest in Germain, her son,
have the same motive. Madame George belongs to the d'Harville family.

“_It is no less to her misfortunes and her virtues than to this
relationship that Poor Madame George owes the ceaseless kindness of His
Highness_.”

The apologist Murph tries to gloss over the ambiguity of Rudolph’s
motives by such expressions as: “_surtout, à part, non moins que_”
["above all”, “apart from” and “no less than"].

The whole of Rudolph’s character is finally summed up in the “_pure_”
_hypocrisy_ by which he manages to see and make others see the
_outbursts of his evil passions_ as _outbursts against the passions of
the wicked_, in a way similar to that in which Critical Criticism
represents _its own stupidities_ as the _stupidities of the Mass,_ its
spiteful rancour at the progress of the world outside itself as the
rancour of the world outside itself at progress, and finally its egoism,
which thinks it has absorbed all Spirit in itself, as the egoistic
opposition of the Mass to the Spirit.

We shall prove _Rudolph’s_ “pure” hypocrisy in his attitude to the
_maître d'école,_ to Countess _Sarah MacGregor_ and to the notary
_Jacques Ferrand_.

In order to lure the _maître d'école_ into a trap and seize him, Rudolph
persuades him to break into his apartment. The interest he has in this
is a purely personal one, not a general human one. The fact is that the
_maître d'école_ has a _portfolio_ belonging to _Countess MacGregor_,
and Rudolph is greatly interested in gaining possession of _it_.
Speaking of Rudolph’s _tête-à-tête_ with the _maître d'école,_ the
author says explicitly:

“Rudolph was cruelly anxious; if he let _slip_ this opportunity of
seizing the maître _d'école,_ he would probably never have another; the
brigand would carry away _the_ secrets that Rudolph was so keen to find
out.”

With the _maître d'école_, Rudolph obtains possession of Countess
MacGregor’s _portfolio_; he _seizes_ the _maître d'école_ out of purely
personal interest; he has him _blinded_ out of personal passion.

When Chourineur tells Rudolph of the struggle of the _maître d'école_
with Murph and gives as the reason for his resistance the fact that he
knew what was in store for him, Rudolph replies: “He did not know”, and
he says “_with a sombre mien, his features contracted by the almost
ferocious expression of which we have spoken_.” The thought of vengeance
flashes across his mind, he anticipates the savage pleasure that the
barbarous punishment of the _maître d'école_ will afford him.

On the entrance of the Negro doctor David, whom he intends to make the
instrument of his _revenge_, Rudolph cries out:

“'Vengeance!... Vengeance!’ s'écria Rodolphe avec une furtur froide et
concentrée” ['Revenge! ... Revenge!’ Rudolph cries out with cold and
concentrated fury]

A cold and concentrated fury is seething in him. Then he whispers his
plan in the doctor’s ear, and when the latter recoils at it, he
immediately finds a “pure” theoretical motive to substitute for
_personal vengeance_. It is only a case, he says, of “_applying an
idea_” that has often flashed across his noble mind, and he does not
forget to add unctuously: “He will still have before him the boundless
horizon of atonement.” He follows the example of the Spanish Inquisition
which, when handing over to civil justice the victim condemned to be
burnt at the stake, added a hypocritical request for mercy for the
repentant sinner.

Of course, when the interrogation and sentencing of the _maître d'école_
is to take place, His Highness is seated in a most comfortable study in
a long, deep black dressing-gown, his features impressively pale, and in
order to copy the court of justice more faithfully, he is sitting at a
long table on which are the exhibits of the case. He must now discard
the expression of rage and revenge with which he told Chourineur and the
doctor of his plan for blinding the _maître d'école._ He must show
himself “calm, sad and composed”, and display the extremely comic,
solemn attitude of a self-styled world judge.

In order to leave no doubt as to the “pure” motive of the blinding, the
silly Murph admits to the envoy Graun:

“The cruel punishment of the _maître_ _d'école_ was intended _chiefly_
to give me my revenge against the assassin.”

In a _tête-à-tête_ with Murph, Rudolph says:

“My hatred of the wicked ... has become stronger, my aversion for Sarah
Bags, doubtless because of the grief caused by the death of my
daughter.”

Rudolph tells us how much stronger his hatred of the wicked has become.
Needless to say, his hatred is a Critical, pure, moral hatred — hatred
of the wicked _because_ they are wicked. That is why he regards this
hatred as his own progress in the good.

At the same time, however, he betrays that this growth of moral hatred
is nothing but a _hypocritical justification_ to excuse the growth of
his _personal aversion_ for Sarah. The vague moral idea of his
increasing hatred of the wicked is only a mask for the definite immoral
fact of his increased aversion for Sarah. This aversion has a very
natural and a very personal basis, his personal grief, which is also the
measure of his aversion. _Sans doute_! [doubtless]

Still more repugnant is the hypocrisy to be seen in Rudolph’s meeting
with the dying Countess MacGregor.

After the revelation of the mystery that Fleur de Marie is the daughter
of Rudolph and the Countess, Rudolph goes up to her “_l'air menaçant,
impitoyable_” [looking threatening and pitiless] She begs for mercy.

“Pas de grace,” he replies, ..malédiction sur vous ... vous ... mon
mauvais génie et celui de ma race.” [No mercy. A curse on you ... you
... my evil genius and the evil genius of my race]

So it is his “race” that he wishes to avenge. He goes on to inform the
Countess how, to atone for his attempted murder of his father, he has
taken upon himself a world crusade for the reward of the good and the
punishment of the wicked. He tortures the Countess, he abandons himself
to his _rage_, but in his _own_ eyes he is only carrying out the task
which he took upon himself after January 13, of “_poursuivre le mal_”.
[prosecuting evil]

As he is leaving, Sarah cries out:

“'Pitié! Je meurs!’ ‘Mourez donc, maudite!’ dit Rodolphe effrayant de
fureur”.
['Have pity! I am dying!’ ‘Die then, accursed one!’ replies Rudolph,
terrible in his rage]

The last words “effrayant de fureur” betray the pure, Critical and moral
motives of his actions. It was the same rage that made him draw his
sword against his father, his _blessed_ father, as Herr Szeliga calls
him. Instead of fighting this evil in himself he fights it, like a pure
Critic, in others.

In the end, Rudolph himself discards his Catholic penal theory. He
wanted to abolish capital punishment, to change punishment into penance,
but only as long as the murderer murdered strangers and spared members
of Rudolph’s family. He adopts the death penalty as soon as one of his
kin is murdered; he needs a double set of laws, one for his own person
and one for ordinary persons.

He learns from Sarah that Jacques Ferrand was the cause of the death of
Fleur de Marie. He says to himself:

“No, it is not enough!... What a burning desire for revenge!... What a
thirst for blood!... What calm, deliberate rage!... Until I knew that
one of the monster’s victims was my child I said to myself: this man’s
death would be fruitless.... Life without money, life without
satisfaction of his frenzied sensuality will be a long and double
torture.... But it is my daughter!... I shall kill this man!”

And he rushes out to kill him, but finds him in a state which makes
murder superfluous.

The “good” Rudolph! Burning with desire for revenge, thirsting for
blood, with calm, deliberate rage, with a hypocrisy which excuses every
evil impulse with its casuistry, he has all the evil passions for which
he gouges out the eyes of others. Only accidental strokes of luck, money
and rank in society save this “good” man from the penitentiary.

“The _power of Criticism_”, to compensate for the otherwise complete
nullity of this Don Quixote, makes him “_bon locataire_”, ‘_bon
voisin_”, “_bon ami_”, “_bon père_”, “_bon bourgeois_”, “_bon citoyen_”,
“_bon prince_”, [A “good tenant”, a “good neighbour”, a “good friend”, a
“good father”, a “good bourgeois”, a “good citizen”, a “good prince"]
and so on, according to Herr Szeliga’s gamut of eulogy. _That is more
than all the results —_ that “_mankind_ in its _entire history_” has
achieved. That is enough for _Rudolph_ to _save “_the _world_” twice
from “_downfall_"!



CHAPTER IX  THE CRITICAL LAST JUDGMENT


Through _Rudolph_, Critical Criticism has twice saved the world from
downfall. but only that it may now _itself_ decree the _end of the
world_.

And I saw and heard a mighty angel, Herr _Hirzel_, flying from Zurich
across the heavens. And he had in his hand a little book open like the
fifth number of the _Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_., and he set his
right foot upon the Mass and his left foot upon Charlottenburg; and he
cried with a loud voice as when a lion roareth, and his words rose like
a dove — chirp! chirp! — to the regions of pathos and thunder-like
aspects of the _Critical Last judgment_.

“When, finally, all is united against Criticism and — _verily, verily I
say unto you —_ this time is no longer far off — when the whole world in
dissolution — to it it was given to fight against the Holy — groups
around Criticism for the last onslaught; then the courage of Criticism
and its significance will have found the greatest recognition. We can
have no fear of the outcome. It will all end by our settling accounts
with the various groups — _and we shall separate them from one another
as the shepherd separateth the sheep from the goats; and we shall set
the sheep on our right hand and the goats on our left_ — and we shall
give a general certificate of poverty to the hostile knights — _they are
spirits of the devil, they go out into the breadth of the world and they
gather to fight on the great day of God the Almighty_ — _and all who
dwell on earth will wonder_.”

And when the angel had cried, seven thunders uttered their voices:

That day of wrath
Will reduce the world to ashes.
When the judge takes his seat
All that is hidden will come to light,
Nothing will remain unpunished.
What shall I, wretch, say then? etc.
[in Latin]

Ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars. All this must first of all
come to pass. For there shall rise false Christs and false prophets,
Messieurs _Buchez_ and _Roux_ from Paris, Herr _Friedrich Rohmer_ and
_Theodor Rohmer_ from Zurich, and they will say: Here is Christ! But
then the sign of the _Bauer_ brothers will appear in Criticism and the
words of the Scripture on _Bauer’s work_ [Bauernwerk — “peasant’s
work"]will be accomplished:

Quand les bceufs vont deux
A deux Le labourage en va mieux!
[With the oxen paired together.
Ploughing goes much better! —
from a French drinking song]


Historical Epilogue

As we learned later, it was not the world, but the Critical
_Literatur-Zeitung_ that came to an end.



NOTES


 1 _The Holy Family, or Critique of Critical Criticism. Against Bruno
Bauer and Co._ is the first joint work of Karl Marx and Frederick
Engels. At the end of August 1844, Engels, on his way back from
Manchester to Barmen, stopped over in Paris, where he had his second
meeting with Marx, a meeting which marked the beginning of their
collaboration as authors.

During the ten days which Engels spent in Paris, he and Marx agreed to
publish a criticism of the representatives of the Young Hegelian trend.
They drew up the plan of a book which they at first called _A Critique
of Critical Criticism. Against Bruno Bauer and Co._, divided the
sections between themselves and wrote the Foreword. Engels wrote his
sections before leaving Paris. Marx, whose share comprised the bigger
part of the book, continued to work on it till the end of November 1844,
considerably increasing the size of the book and drawing on his
“Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts”, on which he had been working
during the spring and summer of 1844, as well as on his studies of the
history of the French Revolution and his notes and summaries. During the
printing of the book, Marx, on the advice of the publisher Löwenthal,
added to the tide the words “The Holy Family”. The book was published in
February 1845 in Frankfurt am Main by the Literarische Anstalt (J.
Rütten) publishers. The table of contents (see contents of this volume,
pp. v-xi) showed which sections had been written by Marx and which by
Engels. The fact that the book, though of small format, exceeded twenty
printed sheets in volume, exempted it from preliminary censorship in
accordance with the regulations operating at the time in a number of
German states.

“The Holy Family” is a sarcastic nickname for the Bauer brothers and
their followers who supported the _Allgemeine_ Literatur-_Zeitung_
published in Charlottenburg from the end of 1843 to October 1844. While
attacking the Bauers and other Young Hegelians, Marx and Engels at the
same time critically analysed the idealist philosophy of Hegel himself.

Marx had shown his disagreement with the Young Hegelians already in the
autumn of 1842 when, as an editor of the Rheinische _Zeitung_, he
opposed the publication of superficial and pretentious articles
submitted by the outwardly ultra-radical Berlin circle of “The Free”
(Edgar Bauer, Max Stirner, Eduard Meyen and others). During the two
years which had elapsed since Marx’s clash with “The Free”, Marx’s and
Engels’ disagreement with the Young Hegelians on questions of theory and
politics had deepened still more. This was accounted for not only by the
transition of Marx and Engels to materialism and communism, but also by
the evolution which had taken place during that time in the ideas of the
Bauer brothers and their fellow-thinkers. In the _Allgemeine_
Literatur-_Zeitung_ Bauer and his group renounced the “radicalism of
1842” and, besides professing subjective idealist views, and
counterposing chosen personalities, the bearers of -.pure-Criticism”, to
the allegedly sluggish and inert masses, they began spreading the ideas
of moderate liberal philanthropy. Marx’s draft of the Preface of his
“Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts” shows that already in the summer
of 1844 he saw in the evolution of the Young Hegelians’ views a
degeneration of that initially progressive trend, a deepening of the
features of mysticism and transcendentalism peculiar to Hegel’s
idealism, the disintegration of the Hegelian school (see present
edition, Vol. 3, p. 233).

It was to exposure of the Young Hegelians’ views in the form which they
had acquired in 1844 and to defence of their own new materialistic and
communists outlook that Marx and Engels decided to devote their first
joint work.

The appearance of _The Holy_ Family evoked a lively response in the
German press. It was pointed out that this work was the most profound
and the most forceful of all that Marx and Engels had recently written
(_Mannheimer Abend-Zeitung_, March 25, 1845), that it expressed
socialist views, since it criticised the “inadequacy of any
half-measures directed at eliminating the social ailments of our time”
(_Kölnische Zeitung_, March 21, 1845).

Reactionary circles immediately discerned the book’s revolutionary
trend. As early as December 1844, when the work was still printing, it
was denounced in reports by Metternich’s agents. The conservative
_Allgemeine_ _Zeitung_, polemising against the assessment of The Holy
Family given by the _Kölnische_ _Zeitung_, wrote with irritation on
April 8, 1845, that in this book “every line preaches revolt ... against
the state, the church, the family, legality, religion and property”,
that in it “prominence is given to the most radical and the most open
communism, and this is all the more dangerous as Mr. Marx cannot be
denied either extremely broad knowledge or the ability to make use of
the polemical arsenal of Hegel’s logic, what is customarily called ‘iron
logic"’. A month and a half later, on May 23, 1845, the _Allgemeine
Zeitung_ again censured the _Kölnische_ _Zeitung_ for publishing a
favourable opinion of _The Holy Family_.

Bruno Bauer’s attempt to refute the criticism publicly (in the article
“Charakteristik Ludwig Feuerbachs”, published in _Wigand’s
Vierteljahrsschrift_, Leipzig, 1845, Bd. III) boiled down essentially to
asserting that he had not been correctly understood. Marx replied to
this “anti-criticism” of Bauer’s with an article published in the
journal _Gesellschaftsspiegel,_ Elberfeld, January 1846 (see present
edition, Vol. 5), which partly coincided in content with the section
“_Der Heilige Bruno gegen die Autoren der_ ‘_Heiligen Familie'_” in
Chapter 2 (“Der Heilige Bruno”) of the first volume of _The German
Ideology_ (see present edition, Vol. 5).

During the lifetimes of Marx and Engels _The Holy Family_ was not
published in English. Only part of subsection d), “Critical Battle
Against French Materialism”, of Chapter VI, was reproduced by Engels in
the Introduction to the 1892 English edition of _Socialism: Utopian and_
_Scientific_ (the German version of this introduction was published in
_Die New Zeit_ in 1895 under the title “Über den französischen
Materialismus des XVIII. Jahrhunderts”).

In the English language _The Holy Family, or Critique of Critical
Criticism_, was published for the first time in 1956 by the Foreign
Languages Publishing House, now Progress Publishers, Moscow, in the
translation by Richard Dixon. The literary features of the work include
the broad use of citations from French authors (Eugène Sue, Pierre
Joseph Proudhon, and others) in the language of the original, alongside
citations translated into German, as well as the use of individual
expressions in foreign languages, especially French. This feature is
preserved in the present edition, the translations of the citations
being given in footnotes. Emphasis in the citations (printed in
clear-face italics or hold-face italics in cases of special emphasis)
mostly belongs to Marx and Engels, who often translated the citations
with abridgments.

 2 The reference is to the review made by the bookbinder C. Reichardt of
A. T. Woeniger’s _Publicistische Abhandlungen_, Berlin, 1843. The review
was published in the _Allgemeine_ _Literatur-Zeitung_, Heft I, December
1843 and Heft II, January 1844, under the general title “Schriften über
den Pauperismus” and mentioned the author’s profession. The short
excerpts and individual expressions quoted by Engels below and at the
end of Chapter 1 are taken from this review.

 3 Here and elsewhere Engels quotes Reichardt’s reviews of C.
Brüggemann’s book, _Preussen Beruf in der deutschen Staats-Entwicklung,
und die nächsten Bedingungen zu seiner Erfüllung_, Berlin, 1843 and A.
Benda’s _Katechismia für_ _wahrberechtige Bürger in Preussen_ Berlin,
1843. Both reviews were published in the _Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_,
Heft VI, May 1844.

 4 The chapter contains a critical analysis of Julius Faucher’s article,
“_Englische Tagesfragen_”, which was published in she _Allgemeine
Literatur_-_Zeitung_, Heft VII, June 1844, Heft VIII, July 1844 (with
the subtitle “Fortsetzung. Lord Ashley’s Amendment”) and Heft IX, August
1844 (with the subtitle “Fortsetzung. Ricardos Motion in Betreff der
Einfuhrzölle”). The excerpts and expressions cited below were taken by
Engels from this article.

The word _Mühleigner_, a literal translation of the English
“mill-owner”, does not exist in German. Engels here ridicules J.
Faucher’s way of using in his articles words which he himself coins
after the English manner (see p. 16 of this volume).

 5 _The national Anti-Corn_ _Law League_ was founded in 1838 by the
Manchester manufacturers Cobden and Bright. The English Corn Laws, first
adopted in the 15th century, imposed high tariffs on agricultural
imports in order to maintain high prices for them on the home market. In
the first third of the 19th century, 1815, 1822, and later several laws
were passed changing the conditions for corn imports, and in 1828 a
sliding scale was introduced which raised import tariffs on corn when
prices in the home market declined and, on the other hand lowered
tariffs when the home market prices rose.

The League widely exploited the popular discontent over the raising of
corn prices. In its efforts to obtain the repeal of the Corn Laws and
the establishment of complete freedom of trade, it aimed at weakening
the economic and political positions of the landed aristocracy and
lowering the cost of living thus making possible a lowering of the
workers’ wages.

The struggle between the industrial bourgeoisie and the landed
aristocracy over the Corn Laws ended in 1846 with the repeal of these
laws.

 6 The struggle for legislation limiting the working day to ten hours
started in England as early as the late 18th century and spread by the
1830s to the mass of the industrial workers. The representatives of the
landed aristocracy saw their chance to use this popular slogan against
the industrial bourgeoisie and supported the Ten Hour Bill in
Parliament; the “Tory philanthropist” Lord Ashley headed the supporters
of the Bill in Parliament from 1833. The Ten Hour Bill, applicable only
to youths and women, was not passed until 1847.

 7 When an important question is being discussed, the House of Commons
sits in “Committee of the Whole House”, which is tantamount to a closed
sitting; in this case the function of committee chairman is performed by
one of the Members named in the list of committee chairmen and appointed
by the speaker.

 8 The reference is to the speech made during the debate on the Ten Hour
Bill in the House of Commons on March 15, 1844, by Sir James Graham,
Home Secretary in Sir Robert Peel’s Tory cabinet (Hansard’s
Parliamentary Debates. Third Series, Vol. LXXIII).

 9 It was with the letter “J”, the first letter of “Jungnitz”, that the
article “Herr Nauwerck und die philosophische Fakultät”, published in
the _Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_, Heft VI, May 1844, was signed. The
publication of this article was preceded by E. Jungnitz’s review of Karl
Nauwerck’s book _Über die Teilnahme am Staate,_ Leipzig, 1844
(_Allgemeine_ Literatur-_Zeitung_, Heft IV, March 1844). Engels took the
short excerpts given below from this article.

 10 The reference is to the dismissal of Bruno Bauer, whom the Prussian
Government deprived, temporarily in October 1841 and permanently in
March 1842, of the right to lecture in Bonn University because of his
works criticising the Bible.

 11 The excerpts cited in this paragraph are from the anonymous article
“Proudhon” published in the _Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_, Heft V,
April 1844. Its author was Edgar Bauer. Marx gives a detailed critical
analysis of this article in section 4 of Chapter IV. E. Bauer’s phrase
“the tranquillity of knowledge” was ironically played up also in other
sections of this chapter written by Marx and Engels.

 12 In this section Engels analyses and cites a review by Edgar Bauer in
the _Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_, Heft V, April 1844, of Flora
Tristan’s Union ouvrière, Paris, 1843.

 13 In this section Engels deals with Edgar Bauer’s review of F. F. A.
Béraud’s _Les filles_ publiques de Paris _et La police qui les régit_,
t. 1-11, Paris et Leipzig, 1839. This review was published in the
Allgemeine Literatur-_Zeitung_, Heft V, April 1844, under the title
“Béraud über die Freudenmädchen”.

 14 In this section Marx criticised and cited Edgar Bauer’s article “Die
Romane der Verfasserin von Godwie Castle”, published in the _Allgemeine
Literatur-Zeitung_, Heft 11, January 1844, and devoted to an analysis of
the works of the German novelist Henriette von Paalzow.

 15 Marx compares with Edgar Bauer’s article “Proudhon” (_Allgemeine
Literatur-Zeitung_, Heft V, April 1844), which he criticises and cites
in this section, excerpts from the second, 184 1, edition of Proudhon’s
_Quest-ce que La propriété? ou Recherches sur Le principe du droit et du
gouvemement_. _Premier mémoire_ (the first edition appeared in 1840 in
Paris). Marx quotes Proudhon’s book sometimes from the French original,
sometimes in his own German translation.

Marx later made a comprehensive critical appraisal of this work of
Proudhon’s in his article “Über Proudhon”, which was published as a
letter to Schweitzer, editor of the _Social-Demokrat_, in 1865.

 16 The “Reformists” were a party of radical opponents of the July
monarchy. The party consisted of democratic republicans and
petty-bourgeois Socialists grouped round the Paris newspaper La
_Réforme._ The leaders of the Réforme party included Ledru-Rollin and
Louis Blanc.

 17 _Digests_ or Pandects were part of a compendium of Roman civil law
(_Corpus iuris civilis_) compiled in 528-34 by Emperor Justinian I of
the Eastern Roman Empire. They contained extracts from the works of
prominent Roman jurists on civil law.

 18 Here and to the end of the subsection “Characterising Translation
No. 4” Marx compared citations from Bauer’s article with excerpts from
another work by Proudhon, _Avertissement aux propriétaires, ou Lettre à
M. Considérant, rédacteur de La Phalange, sur une défense de la
propriété_. In content this book was close to Proudhon’s _Quest-ce que
La_ _propriété_?, the closing section of which, “_Deuxième mémoire.
Lettre à M. Blanqui_, _professeur d'économie politique au conservatoire
des arts et métiers. Sur La Propiétê_’, is quoted above.

 19 The quotations are from an anonymous review of Thiers’ book
_Geschichte der französischen Revolution_ which was published in the
_Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_, Heft VIII, July 1844. In “Critical
Comment No. 5”, Marx continues giving quotations from Edgar Bauer’s
article on Proudhon (_Allgemeine_ Literatur-Zeitung, Heft V), comparing
them with extracts from Proudhon’s book _Quest-ce que la propiétê?_

 20 This chapter deals with and quotes from the review written by the
Young Hegelian Szeliga (the pen-name of F. Z. Zychlinski) on the French
writer Eugène Sue’s novel _Les mystères de Paris_, which was published
in 1843 and became well known as a sample of sentimental social fantasy
woven into an adventure plot.

Szeliga’s review was printed in the _Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_, Heft
VII, June 1844, under the title: “Eugen Sue. Die Geheimnisse von Paris.
Kritik von Szeliga”. Marx continues the critical analysis of this
article in Chapter VIII.

The excerpts from Sue’s novel in the two chapters are given by Marx
either in French or in German translation.

 21 The reference is to the _Charte constitutionnelle_ which was adopted
in France after the bourgeois revolution of 1830 and was the basic law
of the July monarchy.

In its fundamental principles the _Charte constitutionnelle_ reproduced
the constitutional charter of 1814, but the preamble of the 1814
charter, which spoke of the constitution being granted (“octryée”)by the
king, was omitted and the rights of the upper and lower chambers were
extended at the expense of certain royal prerogatives. According to the
new constitution the king was considered only as the head of the
executive authority and was deprived of the right to abrogate or suspend
laws.

The expression “Charte vérité” is an ironical allusion to the concluding
words of Louis Philippe’s proclamation of July 31, 1830: “henceforth the
charter shall be the truth.”

 22 Here and elsewhere quotations are made from Bruno Bauer’s anonymous
article, “Neueste Schriften über die Judenfrage”, which was published in
the _Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_, Heft 1, December 1843. This article
was Bruno Bauer’s reply to criticism in the press of his book Die
Judenfrage, Braunschweig, 1843, . which was a reprint, with some
additions, of his articles on the same subject published in the journal
_Deutsche Jahrbücher für Wissenschaft und Kunst_ in November 1844.

Marx gave a critical analysis of this book in his article “On the Jewish
Question”, which was carried by the _Deutsch-Französische_ _Jahrbücher_
(see present edition, Vol. 3). Later Bauer replied to criticism of his
book in an article he published in the _Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_.
In _The Holy Family_ Marx ironically designates that article as “The
Jewish Question No. 1”, and the following articles as “The Jewish
Question No. 2” and “The Jewish Question No. 3”.

 23 Ludwig Feuerbach’s “Vorläufige Thesen zur Reformation der
Philosophie” was written in January 1842 and prohibited by the censor in
Germany. it was published in 1843 in Switzerland in the second volume of
the collection_, Anekdota zur neuesten deutschen Philosophie und
Publicistik_. This two-volume collection also contained articles by Karl
Marx, Bruno Bauer, Friedrich Köppen, Arnold Ruge, and others.

 24 Doctrinaires-a group of French bourgeois politicians during the
Restoration (1815-1830). They were constitutional monarchists, enemies
of the democratic and revolutionary movement and wished to unite the
bourgeoisie and the nobility. Their ideal was a political system after
the English model, formalising these two privileged classes’ monopoly of
governmental power in opposition to the broad .'uneducated” and
propertyless sections. The best known Doctrinaires were the historian
François Guizot and the philosopher Pierre Paul Royer-Collard.

 25 Concerning Reply No. 1, Bruno Bauer’s first article against critics
of his Die Judenfrage, see Note 22. In this article Bauer polemises with
the authors of a number of reviews on his book, as well as with the
authors of books and pamphlets, including the following: _Die Judenfrage
von Bruno Bauer näher beleuchtet_, by Dr. Gustav Philippson, Dessau,
1843; _Briefe zur Beleuchtung der Judenfrage von Bruno Bauer_, by Dr-.
Samuel Hirsch, Leipzig, 1843; _Literaturblatt des Orients_, 1843, No. 25
& ff. (Recension der Judenfrage von Bruno Bauer und der Briefe von
Hirsch); _Der Israelit des neunzehnten Jahrhundert_, published by Dr. M.
Hess, 1843, and others.

 26 This quotation is from Bruno Bauer’s third article in reply to
criticisms of his book Die Juden frage. The article, a polemic against
Marx and his work “Zur Judenfrage”, published in the
_Deutsch-Französische_ _Jahrbücher_, was printed anonymously in the
_Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_, Heft VIII, July 1844, under the title:
“Was ist jetzt der Gegenstand der Kritik?” Below Marx resumes his
quotations from and criticism of Bruno Bauer’s first article, “Neueste
Schriften über die Judenfrage” published in the _Allgemeine
Literatur-Zeitung_, Heft I, December 1843.

 27 The allusion here is to the five Napoleonic codes.

 28 Here and elsewhere Marx criticises and quotes Bruno Bauer’s review
of the first volume of a course of lectures by the right Hegelian
Hinrichs: _Politische Vorlesungen_, Bd. I-II, Halle, 1843. This review
appeared anonymously in the _Allgemeine_ Literatur-_Zeitung_, Heft I,
December 1843. Subsequently the same monthly (Heft V, April 1844)
carried Bauer’s reviews of the second volume of lectures, which is
analysed in the same chapter of _The Holy Family_ under the title:
“Hinrichs No. 2. ‘Criticism’ and ‘Feuerbach’. Condemnation of
Philosophy.”

 29 Here and elsewhere Engels quotes and analyses Bauer’s anonymous
review of the second volume of Hinrichs’ lectures. The review was
printed in the _Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_, Heft V, April 1844.

 30 Here and elsewhere Marx quotes and analyses Bauer’s second article
in reply to criticism of his Die Judenfrage. it was printed anonymously
under the same title as the first-"Neueste Schriften Über die
Judenfrage"- in the _Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_, Heft IV, March 1844.
The article analyses four polemical works, including Die Judenfrage.
Gegen Bruno Bauer, by Dr. Gabriel Riesser in Hamburg, which appeared in
Weil’s _Konstitutionelle Jahrbücher_, 1843, Bd. 2 and 3.

 31 The reference is to the measures taken by the Convention against
speculators in foodstuffs. in September 1793 the Convention decreed the
establishment of a general maximum-fixed prices for the main food
products and consumer articles; the death penalty was introduced for
speculation in @and concealment of products.

 32 “Was ist jetzt der Gegenstand der Kritik?” was the title of an
article by Bruno Bauer printed anonymously in the _Allgemeine
Literatur-Zeitung_, Heft VIII, July 1844. It was the third polemical
article against critics of his Die Judenfrage, in this case primarily
against Marx’s article “Zur Judenfrage” in the _Deutsch-Französische_
_Jahrbücher_. This article of Bauer’s is quoted and analysed by Marx not
only under the title “Absolute Criticism’s Self-Apology. Its ‘Political’
Past” but also under the other tides in the section “Absolute
Criticism’s Third Campaign”.

 33 In January 1843 the Young Hegelians’ journal _Deutsche Jahrbücher
für Wissenschaft und Kunst_, then appearing in Leipzig (up to July 1841
it had been published in the Prussian town of Halle under the title
_Hallische Jahrbücher für Deutsche Wissenschaft und Kunst_), was closed
down by the government of Saxony and prohibited throughout Germany by a
decree of the Federal Diet. On January 19 of the same year the Prussian
Government decided to forbid as of April 1, 1843, the publication of the
_Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und Gewerbe_, which had been
appearing in Cologne since January 1, 1842, and which, under the
editorship of Marx (from October 1842), had acquired a
revolutionary-democratic trend. Marx’s resignation from the editorship
on March 18, 1843, did not cause the government to rescind its decision,
and the last issue appeared on March 31, 1843.

 34 Concerning Bruno Bauer’s dismissal from the chair of theology, see
Note 10, Bauer replied to the Government’s repressive measures by the
publication in Zurich and Winterthur in 1842 of the pamphlet: _Die gute
Sache der Freiheit und meine eigene Angelegegen_.

 35 The reference is to the review by Karl Christian Planck of Bauer’s
_Kritik der_ _evangelischen Geschichte der Synoptiker_, Bd. 1-2,
Leipzig, 1841, Bd. 3, Braunschweig, 1842. (“Synoptics” is the name given
in the history of religion to the compilers of the first three Gospels.)
The review was published in the _Jahrbücher für wissenschaftliche
Kritik_, Berlin, June 1842, Nos. 107-114. Planck disputed Bauer’s Young
Hegelian theory on the origin of Christianity from the positions of the
more moderate criticism of the Gospel sources given by Strauss.

 36 Marx has in mind the section of Hegel’s book _Phänomenologie des
Geistes_ entitled “Die Kampf der Aufklärung mit dem Aberglauben”.

 37 The article in question is Bruno Bauer’s “Die Fähigkeit der heutigen
Juden und Christen, frei zu werden”, which was published in the
collection Einundzwanzig Bogen aus der Schweiz, Zurich and Winterthur,
1843; along with the book Die Judenfrage (an enlarged edition of Bauer’s
articles on this subject first published in 1842), this article was
subjected to a critical analysis by Marx in his article “Zur Judenfrage”
in the _Deutsch-Französische_ _Jahrbücher_.

 38 The reference is to the attempt to unite the various Lutheran trends
by means of the forced Union of 1817, when the Lutherans were united
with the Reformed (Calvinist) Church to form the Evangelical Church. The
Old Lutherans, who opposed this union, seceded to form their own trend
defending the “true” Lutheran Church.

 39 The reference is to the policy of de-christianisation pursued in
France by Hébert and his supporters in the autumn of 1793. Outwardly it
was expressed in the closing of churches and the renunciation of
Catholic rites. The forcible methods used to implement these measures
outraged believers, especially among the peasants.

 40 In their efforts to consolidate the Jacobin dictatorship,
Robespierre and his supporters opposed the policy of
de-Christianisation. A decree of the Convention on December 6, 1793,
prohibited “all violence or threats directed against the freedom of
worship”.

 41 _Cercle social_ — an organisation established by democratic
intellectuals in Paris in the first years of the French Revolution. Its
chief spokesman, Claude Fauchet, demanded an equalitarian division of
the land, restrictions on large fortunes and employment for all
able-bodied citizens. The criticism to which Fauchet and his supporters
subjected the formal equality proclaimed in the documents of the French
Revolution prepared the ground for bolder action in defence of the
destitute by Jacques Roux, Théophile Leclerc and other members of the
radical-plebeian “Enragés”.

 42 Marx has in mind the _Histoire parlementaire de la Révolution
français_, t. 1-40, Paris, 1834-38, published by the French historian
and publicist Ph. J. Buchez jointly with P. C. Roux-Lavergne. It
consisted of numerous documents. The introductory articles by Buchez, a
former Republican and pupil of Saint-Simon, who adopted the views of
Christian Socialism in the 1830s, praised the Jacobins’ activity and
their revolutionary traditions but censured the steps taken by them
against the Catholic clergy.

 43 Robespierre’s speech, “Rapport sur les principes de morale politique
qui doivent guider la Convention nationals dans 1'administration
intérieure de la République, fait au nom du comité de saint public, à la
séance du 5 février (17 Pluviôse) 1794”, is quoted according to the
German translation of the Histoire parlementaire de La Révolution
française, by Buchez and Roux-Lavergne, t. 31, Paris, 1837.

 44 The report made by Saint-just in the name of the Committees of
Public Safety and of General Security at the Convention’s sitting of
March 31 (11 Germinal), 1794, is quoted according to the German
translation of the _Histoire parlementaire de la Révolution française_,
by Buchez and Roux-Lavergne,.t. 32, Paris, 1837.

 45 The text of the report made by Saint-just on the police at the
Convention’s sitting of April 15 (26 Germinal), 1794, was published in
the _Histoire parlementaire de la Révolution française_, by Buchez and
Roux-Lavergne, t. 32, Paris, 1837.

 46 The Directory- the regime established in France as a result of the
overthrow of the Jacobin government on July 27 (9 Thermidor), 1794, and
the introduction on November 4, 1795, by the Thermidor Convention, of a
new anti-democratic constitution. Supreme executive power was
concentrated in the hands of five Directors. The Directory, whose rule
was marked by the flowering of enterprise and speculation, remained in
existence until the coup d'état of November 9 (18 Brumaire), 1799, which
completed the bourgeois counter-revolution and led to the personal rule
of General Napoleon Bonaparte.

 47 The reference is apparently to the relevant articles in the
_Staats-Lexikon, oder_ _Encyklopädie der Staatswissenchaften,_ Bd. 1-15,
1834-48, published by the German liberal historian C. Rotteck and the
German liberal jurist C. Welcker. Rotteck was also the author of the
four-volume _Allgemeine für Weltgeschichte für alle Stände_, _von den
frühesten Zeiten bis zum Jahre 1831_, Stuttgart, 1833.

 48 The first complete edition of the work of P.J.G. Cabanis appeared in
Paris in 1802. But a considerable part had been published in 1798 and
1799 in the Transactions of the French Academy, under the title: _Traité
du physique et du moral de 1'homme_.

 49 The _Jansenists_ — named after the Dutch theologian Cornelius Jansen
— were an opposition trend among French Catholics in the 17th and early
18th centuries. Their views were vigorously resisted by official
Catholicism.

 50 A large excerpt from this subsection of _The Holy Family_. beginning
with this sentence and ending with the words: “... deism is but an
easy-going way of getting rid of religion"'(see p. 129 of this volume),
was subsequently included with a few changes by Engels in his
Introduction to the 18'92 English edition of his Socialism: Utopian and
Scientific. Accordingly the passage is here given in Engels’ translation
except for the changes which he made.

 51 The Nominalists were adherents of a trend in medieval scholasticism,
generally considered heretical and dangerous, which maintained that only
individual things exist and that generality belongs only to words. They
criticised the traditional .,realist” doctrine, derived from Plato, that
universals or “ideas” have real existence above and independent, of
individual things, and likewise the “conceptualist” view that while
universals do not exist outside the mind they do exist in the mind as
general conceptions. The doctrine of Nominalism was later forcefully
taken up and developed by the English materialist philosopher Thomas
Hobbes.

 52 _Homoemeriae_, according to the teaching of the ancient Greek
philosopher Anaxagoras, are tiny qualitatively determined material
particles which are infinite in number and variety and form the primary
basis of all that exists; their combinations constitute all the variety
of things.

 52a In his Introduction to the 1892 English edition of his Socialism:
Utopian and Scientific, Engels gives the following explanation of this
term: “'Qual’ is a philosophical play upon words. Qual literally means
torture, a pain which drives to action of some kind; at the same time
the mystic Böhme puts into the German word something of the meaning of
the Latin qualitas; his ‘qual’ was the activating principle arising
from, and promoting in its turn, the spontaneous development of the
thing, relation, or person subject to it, in contradistinction to a pain
inflicted from without.”

 53 Claude Adrien Helvétius, _De 1'homme, de ses facultés intellectual
et de son éducation_, London, 1773. The first edition of this work,
published after the author’s death, appeared in London due to the
efforts of the Russian ambassador in Holland, D.A. Golitsyn.

 54 Many of the works by the philosophers mentioned were vigorously
denounced by the Church and the Government authorities. La Mettrie’s
book, _L'homme machine_, published anonymously in Leyden in 1748, was
burned and its author was banished from Holland, where he had emigrated
from France in 1745. When the first edition of Holbach’s _Système de La
Nature, ou des Loix du Monde physique et du Monde moral_ was put out in
1770, the name of the author was given as J. B. Mirabeau, secretary of
the French Academy who had died in 1760.

 55 The first edition of Helvétius’ book _De l'esprit_ was published
anonymously in Paris in 1758 and was burned by the public executioner in
1759.

 56 The first edition of Holbach’s _Système social, ou principes
naturels de la morale et de la politique_ was published anonymously in
three volumes in 1773.

 57 This is an allusion to the hostile campaign conducted for a number
of years by the conservative _Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung_ against
socialism and communism. In October 1842, this paper accused the
_Rheinische Zeitung_, whose editor was Marx, of spreading communist
views. In reply Marx published his article “Communism and the _Augsburg
Allgemeine Zeitung_” (see present edition, Vol. 1).

 58 The reference is to members of a political grouping which formed in
France around the newspaper La _Réforme_ (see Note 16). One of the
leaders of this grouping, the petty-bourgeois Socialist Louis Blanc, put
out in 1839-40 a pamphlet entitled _L'organisation du travail_, which
became widely known.

 59 This is an ironic allusion to the ancient Roman tradition about the
geese whose cackling saved Rome in 390 B.C. by waking the guards at the
approach of the Gauls who had laid siege to the Capitol.

 60 The quotation is taken from Bruno Bauer’s review of the book _Leben
und Wirken Friedrich von Sallet’s, nebst Mitheillungen aus dem
literarischen Nachlasse Desselden_ Breslau, 1844. The review was
published anonymously in the _Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_, Heft VIII,
July 1844.

 61 Below Marx gives excerpts from the following reports: Zerrleder,
“Correspondenz aus Bern” (_Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_, Heft III,
February 1844, Heft VI, May 1844); E. Fleitchhammer, “Correspondenz aus
Breslau” (ibid., Heft IV, March 1844); Hirzel, “Correspondenz aus
Zürich” (ibid., Heft IV, March 1844, Heft V, April 1844); “Correspondenz
aus der Provinz” (ibid., Heft VI, May 1844).

 62 Bruno Bauer’s reply (on behalf of the paper’s editorial board) to
the Tübingen correspondent was published in the _Allgemeine
Literatur-Zeitung_, Heft VI, May 1844, under the heading “Correspondenz
aus der Provinz”. Excerpts from the reports published under this heading
in the same issue are given below.

 63 _Berlin Couleur_ was the name by which the correspondent of the
_Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_ mentioned above designated the Berlin
Young Hegelians who did not belong to Bruno Bauer’s group and criticised
the _Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_ on a number of petty points. Max
Stirner was one of them.

The excerpts quoted in this and the concluding subsection of the chapter
are from the anonymous letters published under the heading
“Correspondenz aus der Provinz” in the _Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_,
Heft VI, May 1844, as are also the editors’ replies to these letters.

 64 By the “philosophy of identity” is meant Schelling’s early
philosophical views which he expounded at the beginning of the 19th
century. These views were based on the idea of the absolute identity of
thinking and being, consciousness and matter as the root of everything
which exists. These views represented a transitional stage in the
development of German classical philosophy, from the subjective idealism
of Fichte to the absolute idealism of Hegel. But Schelling himself, in
whose philosophical outlook religiosity and mysticism later came to
dominate, not only condemned Hegel’s philosophy in his subsequent
pronouncements, and particularly in his lectures on the “Philosophy of
Revelation” in Berlin University in 1841-42 (which were critically
analysed by the young Engels in his pamphlet Schelling and Revelation);
he even renounced the rational elements of his own “philosophy of
identity” (see present edition, Vol. 2).

 65 The reference is to F. Gruppe’s pamphlet Bruno Bauer und die
_akademische Lehrfreiheit_ Berlin, 1842, directed against Bruno Bauer
and the Young Hegelians.. Marx had criticised this polemical pamphlet,
which was written from a conservative standpoint (see present edition,
Vol. 1, pp. 211-14).

 66 The reference is to the article “Emigranten und Märtyrer. Ein
Beitrag zur Charakteristik der _Deutsch-Französischen Jahrbücher’,_ by
H. L. Egidius, published in the journal _Konstitutionelle Jahrbücher_,
1844, Bd. II.

 67 The quotations from Fourier’s works _Le nouveau monde industriel et
sociétaire, Théorie des quatre mouvements et des destinées, generales_
(the first edition was published in 1808) are given by Marx in his own
translation and the quotation from _Théorie de l'unité universelle_ is
in French.

 68 Marx had in mind Théodore Dizamy, Jules Gay and their supporters,
whose materialistic outlook he characterised in Chapter VI of The _Holy_
Family (see p. 131 of this volume). The revolutionary and materialistic
trend of French utopian communism included also the secret Babouvist
societies of the 1840s influenced by the “travailleurs égalitaires”,
which consisted mainly of workers and published the journal
_l'Égalitaire_, and the “_humanitaires_”, supporters of the journal
_l'Humanitaire_. In 1843 Engels wrote about the criticism of bourgeois
marriage and family relations by representatives of these societies in
his article “Progress of Social Reform on the Continent” (see present
edition, Vol. 3, p. 392)

 69 This is an allusion to the leading role played by K. H. Sack, a
professor of Bonn University, in the campaign waged by reactionary
theological circles against the Young Hegelians, which began in
connection with Bruno Bauer’s transfer as a privat-dozent from Berlin to
Bonn in 1839. Especially sharp attacks were made against Bauer’s
criticism of the Gospel sources and the atheistic conclusion, following
from his views on the origin of Christianity. In March 1842, Bauer was
dismissed from Bonn University. The theological opponents of the Young
Hegelians were ridiculed in Engels’ satirical poem “The Insolently
Threatened Yet Miraculously Rescued Bible”, in which Sack figures under
the ironical name of Beutel (in German, _Sack_ means sack, _Beutel_ —
pouch) (see present edition, Vol. 2, pp. 313-51).

 70 The reference is to the petty German princes who lost their power
and saw their possessions annexed by larger German states as a result of
the reshaping of the political map of Germany during the Napoleonic wars
and at the Vienna Congress (1814-15).

 71 “_Young England_” was a group of conservative writers and
politicians, including Disraeli and Lord John Manners, who were close to
the Tory philanthropists and formed a separate group in the House of
Commons in 1841. Voicing the landed aristocracy’s dissatisfaction at the
political and economic strengthening of the bourgeoisie, they criticised
the capitalist system and supported half-hearted philanthropic measures
for improving the condition of the workers. “Young England”
disintegrated as a political group in 1845 and ceased to exist as a
literary trend in 1848. In the _Manifesto of the Communist Party_ Marx
and Engels characterised the views of “Young England” as “feudal
socialism” (see present edition, Vol. 6). See Engels’ characterisation
of it in the footnote on p. 578 of this volume.

 72 Engels’ article on “Continental Socialism” was written in the form
of a private letter, which the addressee forwarded to the editorial
office of the weekly _The New Moral World_, preceded and followed by
accompanying texts (it appeared in this form in the paper). However,
there are grounds for assuming that the introductory and concluding
texts, written in the third person, were also written by Engels, who had
his reasons for resorting to this indirect way of publishing his
writings. This assumption is supported by the fact that the accompanying
text is signed with the pen-name “Anglo-German”, most probably pointing
to Engels, who had lived some two years in England and had a good
knowledge of conditions there. Apparently the note to the text of the
letter was also by Engels.

 73 _Ham Common folks_ — a group of English Utopian Socialists who
organised the Concordium Colony at Ham Common, near London, in 1842;
followers of the English mystic James Pierrepont Greaves (1777-1842),
the Ham Common Socialists preached moral perfection and an ascetic way
of life; the colony broke up after only a short existence.

 74 The reference is to the attempt made by France during her conquest
of Algeria to bring neighbouring Morocco also under her control. In
August 1844, accusing the Sultan of Morocco of helping Abd-el-Kader, the
chief of the Algerian tribes who were resisting French rule, the French
started hostilities against Morocco. The Sultan was defeated and forced
to cease his assistance to Abd-el-Kader and in 1845 sign a treaty
advantageous to France.

 75 The “Description of Recently Founded Communist Colonies Still in
Existence” was compiled by Engels on the basis of materials published in
_The_ _New Moral World, The_ Northern Star and other publications. The
main source was a series of 29 letters written by the Owenite John Finch
and published in The _New_ Moral World between January 13 and October
19, 1844, under the title “Notes of Travel in the United States”. Engels
gives some excerpts from Finch’s letters in his own, rather free, German
translation and italicises certain words and passages (the features of
his method of quoting are taken into account in the present edition). In
describing the communist colony of Harmony Hall in Hampshire, which Was
founded by Owen’s followers in 1841 and existed until the be-ginning of
1846, Engels drew on Somerville’s essay _A Journey to Harmony Hall, in
Hampshire; with some particulars of the Socialist Community, to which
the attention of the Nobility, Gentry and clergy is earnestly
requested_. This essay was published in _The Morning Chronicle_ on
December 13, 1842, and signed “One who has whistled at the Plough”.

Engels’ “Description” was published in the annual _Deutsches Bürgerbuch
für 1845_ without any signature. Engels’ authorship is confirmed by his
own reference to this material in a series of articles on the progress
of communism in Germany published in the spring of 1845 in _The New
Moral World_ (see p. 240 of this p. 214 volume).

 76 The quotation is taken from the correspondence of Lawrence
Pitkeithly of Huddersfield, “Where to, and how to proceed. Description
of the Shaker Villages” (_The Northern Star_ No. 286, May 6, 1843).

 77 The _Unitarians_ (or _Anti-Trinitarians_) reject the dogma of the
“Holy Trinity”. The Unitarian Church first arose in England and America
in the 17th century, and its teachings emphasise the moral and ethical
side of the Christian religion in contrast to its external ritualist
aspect.

 78 The series of articles “Rapid Progress of Communism in Germany” was
Engels’ last contribution to the London Owenite weekly _The New Moral
World_. The series was written in the form of three letters to the
editors, and printed in that form in the newspaper, only the first of
them bearing a tide. The numbering of the articles in the present
edition is by the editors.

 79 The riot of the Silesian weavers took place on June 2-4, 1844, and
was described by Marx in his article, “Critical Marginal Notes on the
Article ‘The King of Prussia and Social Reform. By a Prussian"’, and by
Engels in his reports “News from Prussia”, and “Further Particulars of
the Silesian Riots” (see present edition, Vol. 3). Soon after the
Silesian events, in the second half of June 1844, there was a rising of
textile workers in Prague, which led to workers’ uprisings in a number
of other Bohemian industrial areas, including Reichenberg (now called
Liberec) and Böhmisch Leipa (now called Czeska Lipa). The workers’
movement, which was accompanied by the wrecking of factories and the
destruction of machinery, was suppressed by government troops.

 80 The reference is to the article “Ein ‘socialistischer’ Spuk”, which
was published unsigned in a supplement to the _Kölnische Zeitung_ No.
314, November 9, 1844.

 81 The translation was made by Engels after the earlier version of
Heine’s poem “Die Schlesischen Weber”. Unlike the text first published
in the newspaper _Vorwärts!_ No. 55, July 10, 1844, the first stanza of
this translation has an additional line, the third. A later version,
edited by the author, with the additional, fifth stanza, was published
in 1847.

 82 In _The New Moral World_ the letter was dated February 22. But
Engels reports on events which he witnessed or took part in between
February 2 and 22, in particular the communist meeting at Elberfeld on
February 8, not in this, but in the following article of the series (see
pp. 237-38 of this volume). Hence either the-dating is a misprint, or
else was deliberately changed by the editors in order to disguise the
time lag between the writing of the article and its publication.

 83 The reference is to the “_Associations for the Benefit of the
Working Classes”_ which were formed in a number of Prussian towns in
1844-45 on the initiative of the German liberal bourgeoisie, which had
been alarmed by the _rising of the Silesian weavers_, in the summer of
1844 (see Note 79). They hoped by this means to divert the German
workers from militant forms of struggle. But despite the efforts of the
bourgeoisie and the governmental authorities to give these associations
an innocent and philanthropical appearance, their establishment only
gave fresh impetus to the urban masses’ political activity and drew the
attention of broad sections of German society to the social question.
The scope of the movement to establish such associations was especially
great in the towns of the industrial Rhine province, where the
antagonisms between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat were acute and
Prussian absolutism was faced with a radical-democratic opposition. The
revolutionary-democratic intelligentsia used meetings called to set up
associations and discuss their statutes for the purpose of popularising
radical ideas and counteracting the influence of the clergy and the
liberal bourgeoisie. Seeing that the associations had taken so unlooked
for a direction, the Prussian Government hastily cut short their
activity in the spring of 1845 by refusing to approve their statutes and
forbidding them to continue their work.

In _Elberfeld_ in November 1844 an Educational Society was founded. From
the very beginning its organisers had to fight attempts by the local
clergy to bring it under their influence and give its activity a
religious colouring. Engels and his friends wished to use the society’s
meetings and its committee to spread communist views. The statute of the
society was not approved by the authorities and the society itself
ceased to exist in the spring of 1845.

 84 The reference is to the annual _Deutsches Bürgerbuch für 1845_,
established in Darmstadt by the radical publicist H. Püttmann in
December 1844. Besides several articles of the German or “true”
socialist trend which was then emerging, the journal carried works by
such revolutionary-democratic writers as W. Wolff and the poet G.
Weerth. It also contained Engels’ essay “Description of Recently Founded
Communist Colonies Still in Existence” (see pp. 214-28 of this volume
and Note 75). The next issue of the _Deutsches Bürgerbuch_, which
appeared in Mannheim in the summer of 1846, contained Engels’
translation of “A Fragment of Fourier’s on Trade”, which he made in
summer and autumn 1845, with an introduction and a conclusion censuring
for the first time the tendencies inherent in “true socialism” (see pp.
613, 642-43 of this volume). The “true Socialists” and the publications
spreading their views, among them the _Deutsches Bürgerbuch_, were later
criticised in detail by Marx and Engels in _The German Ideology_ and
other works (see present edition, Vol. 5).

 85 What is meant is the prospectus of H. Püttmann’s projected journal
Rheinische Jahrbücher _gesellschaftlichten Reform._ Only two issues
appeared, the first in Darmstadt in August 1845, the second in the small
town of Bellevue, on the German-Swiss border, at the end of 1846. Marx
and Engels used them to spread their communist views in Germany. The
first issue carried the texts of Engels speeches at meetings in
Elberfeld on February 8 and 15, 1845 (ace pp. 243-64 of this volume),
and the second contained his article “Festival of Nations in London”
(see present edition, Vol. 6). It was for this journal that Marx
prepared in the spring of 1845 a long article on the German economist
List (see pp. 265-93 of this volume). However, the journal was dominated
by the “true Socialists”, and Marx and Engels afterwards severely
criticised it in _The German Ideology_ (see present edition, Vol. 5).

 86 The reference is to the monthly _Gesellschaftspiegel_ Engels helped
to organise this publication and compile its prospectus (see pp. 671-74
of this volume), but did not become one of its editors. The journal,
which began to appear in 1845 in Elberfeld, edited by M. Hess, carried
in January 1846 Marx’s article “Peuchet: On Suicide” (see pp. 597-612 of
this volume). But. articles by “true Socialists” predominated.

 87 On January 16, 1845, the French authorities decided to banish from
France Marx, Heine, Bürgers, Bakunin and other contributors to
_Vorwärts!_ The Prussian Government had already made repeated attempts
to persuade the Guizot cabinet to close down the paper, and had launched
a campaign against it in the reactionary press. Under pressure from
public opinion the French Government was forced to annul its decision to
expel Heine. But, on February 3, Marx was obliged to leave Paris and
settle in Brussels.

Before his departure, on February 1, 1845, Marx concluded a contract
with the Darmstadt publisher K.F.J. Leske for the publication of his
two-volume work _Kritik der Politik und Nationalökonomie_ (see the
Appendices to this volume).

 88 The reference is to the collection _Neue Anekdota_, which was
published in Darmstadt in May 1845. It contained newspaper articles by
M. Hess, K. Grün, O. Lüning and others, written mainly in the first half
of 1844, which had been banned by the censor. Soon after the publication
of the collection, Marx and Engels made a number of severely critical
remarks about its contents, as can be seen from Grün’s letters to Hess.

 89 The reference is to the projected publication in German of the
“Library of the Best Foreign Socialist Writers”, which, as we learn from
Engels’ letters to Marx from Barmen in February and March 1845, was
repeatedly discussed by the two friends.

A list, written by Marx, of authors whose works he proposed for
inclusion in the “Library” is still extant (see p. 667 of this volume).
But the project was not realised. The only work completed was “A
Fragment of Fourier’s on Trade” compiled by Engels with an introduction
and a conclusion by him (see pp. 613-44 of this volume).

 90 “_Secret offices_” or “black offices” were establishments under the
postal departments in France, Prussia, Austria and a number of other
countries to deal with the inspection of correspondence. They had been
in existence since the time of the absolute monarchies in Europe.

 91 On February 8, 15 and 22, 1845, meetings to discuss communism were
held in Elberfeld and aroused considerable public interest. The second
and third meetings attracted especially large attendances — from 130 to
200. Discussion of lectures and of readings from socialist literature,
including poetry by Shelley and other authors, lasted many hours. As
well as socialist-minded intellectuals, the audiences consisted largely
of bourgeois from Barmen and Elberfeld with a sprinkling of visitors
from other towns in the Rhine province of Prussia (Cologne and
Düsseldorf). “All of Elberfeld and Barmen, from the monied aristocracy
to small shopkeepers, were represented, the proletariat being the only
exception,” Engels wrote to Marx on February 22 about the third meeting,
which had just taken place. He also described the two preceding ones.
The meetings upset the local authorities, who took steps to put an end
to public discussions on the subject.

Engels spoke on February 8 and 15. On February 22 excerpts were read
from the essay on Communist Colonies which he had compiled and published
about that time (see pp. 214-28 of this volume). An account of the
meeting is included in the third report in his series on the progress of
communism in Germany, published in _The New Moral World_ (see pp. 237-39
of this volume).

The texts of Engels’ speeches, prepared for publication by the author,
were published together with excerpts from other speakers (M. Hess, G.
A. Köttgen) in August 1845 in the first issue of Rheinische _Jahrbücher
zur gesellschaftlichen Reform_ (pp. 45-62 and 71-86). The tide “Speeches
in Elberfeld” has been taken from Engels’ letter to Marx on March 17,
1845, in which he himself uses it.

 92 In 1892 Engels returned, in the Preface to the English edition of
_The Condition of the Working-Class in England_, to the problem of the
cyclical character of economic crises in the early 19th century. “The
recurring period of the great industrial crises is stated in the text as
five years,” he wrote. “This was the period apparently indicated by the
course of events from 1825 to 1842. But the industrial history from 1842
to 1868 has shown that the real period is one of ten years; that the
intermediate revulsions were secondary, and tended more and more to
disappear.”

 93 See Note 79.

 94 _The Customs Union_ (_Zollverein_) of the German states (initially
they numbered 18), which established a common customs frontier, was
founded in 1834 and headed by Prussia. By the 1840s the Union embraced
most of the German states, with the exception of Austria, the Hansa
cities (Bremen, Lubeck, Hamburg) and a few small states. Brought into
being by the demand for an all-German market, the Customs Union
contributed to Germany’s eventual political unification.

 95 In 1842, as a result of the so-called first Opium War, which Britain
had been waging against China since 1839, the unequal Nanking Treaty was
imposed; one of the clauses envisaged the opening to English trade of
five Chinese cities: Canton, Shanghai, Amoy, Ninbo and Fuchou.

 96 This work-a draft of an article against the German economist
Friedrich List-was recently discovered among Marx’s manuscripts which
remained for a long time in the keeping of the grandchildren of his
eldest daughter, Jenny Longuet. Marx and Engels had reacted critically
to List’s book (published in 1841) as early as February 1844 in the
_Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher_ (see present edition, Vol. 3, 178,
421). Later they concluded that a full-scale criticism should be
published of his views as typifying the attitudes of the German
bourgeoisie-its striving for complete freedom of action to exploit the
German workers without prejudice to the privileges of the nobility and
its support of the feudal-monarchical political system while seeking to
force the government to protect bourgeois interests against foreign
competition. In a letter to Marx on November 19, 1844, Engels mentioned
that he intended writing a pamphlet on List, and in another letter, on
March 17, 1845, he greatly approved of Marx’s own plans to publish in
the journal _Rheinische Jahrbücher zur gesellschaftlichen Reform_,
projected by Püttmann, a critical analysis of List’s views. In his
pamphlet Engels proposed to expand the critical remarks on List’s
practical suggestions (introduction of a protective system) which he had
made in the second of his “Speeches in Elberfeld” (see pp. 258-62 of
this volume). However, Engels did not write that pamphlet.

Neither did Marx’s article on List appear in print. The extant drafts of
the manuscript, abounding in abbreviations, erasures, corrections and
insertions, are incomplete. The first sheet, apparently containing the
author’s title of she article and of the first chapter, is missing.
Sheets 10-21 and 22 have also not been found. The extant part consists
of large-size sheets numbered by Marx himself. Of these, numbers 2-5,
containing four pages of text each, and sheet 6, containing text on the
first three pages, belong to the first chapter. Following them is a
small fragment on a separate unnumbered sheet. The second chapter, with
the author’s title, has reached us more complete and comprises sheets
7-9, containing four pages each. Of the third chapter only sheet 22 (two
fragments filling two pages) and sheet 24 (four pages of text) are
extant. The fourth chapter has the author’s title and fills one
unnumbered sheet (four pages).

In his manuscript Marx analyses and quotes the first volume of List’s
book according to the 1841 edition — _Friedrich List, Das nationals
System der politischen Oekonomie. Erster Band. Der internationale
Handel, die Handelspolitik und der deutsche Zollverein_, Stuttgart and
Tübingen, 1841. At the beginning of 1845 Marx made numerous excerpts
from this edition which he used in his work. He quotes French sources in
his own German translation, with the exception of one excerpt, from a
work by Louis Say, which he purposely quotes in French to show List’s
deliberately inaccurate way of quoting. The emphasis in the quotations
belongs for the most part to Marx.

In publishing the work in this edition, obvious slips of the pep in the
manuscript have been corrected, editorial insertions have been made (in
square brackets) where meaning might otherwise be obscure and some
passages have been divided into paragraphs additional to those given by
the author. Where the author’s titles to chapters are missing, titles
(in square brackets) have been supplied by the editors. The numbers of
the sheets in the manuscript are given in Arab figures in square
brackets. Words and phrases crossed out in the manuscript are not
reproduced, although some of them have been taken into account in
deciphering illegible passages. In the second chapter a number of
paragraphs were crossed out by the author with a vertical line. Marx
usually did that when he was using the crossed out passage in another
place or in another variant of the work. Since the pages of the
manuscript to which these passages could have been transferred are
missing, the passages crossed out are reproduced in the context in
question in angle brackets.

 97 The word “obstacle” is written in the manuscript over the word
“inconvenience”. And later in the text Marx repeatedly uses this method
of proposing variants. In the translation such words are given in
brackets after the word over which the variant is written.

 98 A _Molossus_ in ardent prosody was a foot of three Ion syllables
Marx uses the term ironically to describe List’s heavy style.

 99 In numbering this point 3 Marx probably made a slip, since the
preceding point is also numbered 3. The next point in the manuscript is
numbered 4 (see below, p. 273).

 100 The Tribunate was one of the four legislative institutions
introduced in France by the Constitution of 1799 after the coup d'état
of 18-19 Brumaire (g- 1 0 November), 1799, which established the
dictatorship of Napoleon Bonaparte. The Tribunate was abolished in 1807.

 101 The _Notice historique sur La vie et les ouvrages du J.B. Say_ was
prefaced to the seventh, supplementary, volume of Say’s course in
Political Economy, which was published soon after the author’s death
under the title: _Cours comput d'économie politique pratique. Volume
complimentaire. Milanges et correspondence d'économie politique; ouvrage
posthume de J.B. Say, public par Charles Comte, son gendre_, Paris,
1833. Marx quotes with abridgments separate passages from pp. iii-xii of
the “Notice historique” by Charles Comte.

 102 The Anti-Corn Law League — see Note 5.

The movement for land reform, free allotment of plots to every worker
and other democratic reforms arose in the 1840s in the United States of
America and was headed by the National Reform Association.

 103 Ironical allusions to List’s arguments and use of words. The words
enclosed in inverted commas by Marx-"freie, mächtige und reiche Bürger”
— allude to List’s expression “das Aufkommen eines freien, industriellen
und reichen Bürgertums” (the rise of a free, industrial and rich
bourgeoisie) on page lxvi of his book. On page lxiv List claims credit
for having shown the German gentry how profitable for them was the
existence of an industrial bourgeoisie “zealously” working to increase
the rents of their estates.

 104 “Confederation” is one of List’s favourite words. He speaks of “the
confederation of various activities”, “the confederation of various
knowledge”, “the confederation of various forces” (see List, op. cit.,
p. 223).

 105 On page 208 of his book, List illustrates his teaching on
productive forces and exchange values by the example of two fathers,
each of whom has five sons and owns an estate bringing 1,000 talers net
annual income in excess of what he expends to support his family. One of
them places his 1,000 talers in a bank at interest and forces his sons
to perform hard unskilled labour; the other uses his 1,000 talers to
give his sons a higher education, so that they become highly skilled
agronomists or engineers. According to List, the first father shows
concern for the increase of exchange values, the second for the increase
of productive forces. On page 209 List speaks of the Christian religion
and monogamy as “rich sources of productive force”.

 106 List says: “Workshops and factories are the mothers and children of
civic freedom, education, the arts and sciences.

 107 Below Marx makes clear that he understands “the abolition of
labour” to mean the elimination of the existing forms of exploitation of
labour, the enslavement and alienation of the working man, and
emphasises the need to create social conditions under which industrial
labour and industry would cease to be an object and instrument of
oppression but would serve as a means for man to use his capacities and
to master the forces of nature (see pp. 280-82 of this volume).

 108 An allusion to the expression “industrial education”, which is
frequently used by List.

 109 By _manufacturing force_ (“die Manufakturkraft”) List understands
the productive power of factory industry. But he often uses this
expression simply in the sense of factory industry.

 110 An allusion to List’s statement that his “theory of the productive
forces” _should be worked out scientifically_ (“wissenschaftlich
auszubilden sei”) side by side with “the theory of exchange values”
developed by the “Smith-Say school” (List, op. cit., p. 187).

 111 The reference is to List’s argument, in Chapter 24 of his book,
about the importance of “continuity” and “uninterruptedness of
production” in the development of factory industry, the preservation and
perfection of its technical means and the production skills of the
workers. In comparing these arguments with those of J. F. Bray, Marx had
in mind the latter’s book, _Labour’s Wrongs and Labour’s Remedy; or the
Age of Might and the Age of Right_, Leeds, 1839, which proved the
injustice of the hereditary property of capitalists and landowners as
non-productive and parasitic classes. In _The Poverty of Philosophy_
(1847) Marx characterised Bray’s views as communist (see present
edition, Vol. 6).

 112 The term _costs of production_ (“Produktionskosten”) is used by
Marx in the sense of value of the product.

 113 See Note 5.

 114 The _Methuen Treaty_ was a trade treaty concluded on December 27,
1703, between England and Portugal (by Lord Methuen for the English)
-allies in the War of Spanish Succession (fought by the
Anglo-Austro-Dutch coalition against France and Spain). The treaty
opened wide access in Portugal for English woollens, in return for which
Portugal received the right to export its wines to England on privileged
terms. In his book List emphasised that this treaty was unfavourable to
Portugal.

 115 Engels’ plans to produce a big work on the social history of
England were formed while he was still living in that country (from
November 1842 to August 1844). Initially he intended to implement them
in the form of a series of articles in the _Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher_ under the general title of The Condition of England. The
February 1844 issue of the journal carried the first article in this
series, and the other articles were published later in the Paris
_Vorwärts!_ (August-October, 1844 — see present edition, Vol. 3) since
the _Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher_ had ceased to be published. The
series, however, remained incomplete. In the articles he wrote Engels
was able merely to touch upon his main theme — the condition of the
working class in England. He intended to amplify it later in one of the
central chapters of his intended book on the social history of England,
but in the end his realisation of the proletariat’s special role in
bourgeois society prompted him to make the condition of the English
working class the object of a special study.

Upon his return to Barmen early in September 1844, Engels at once set
about the accomplishment of his revised plan, using material he had
collected while in England. “I am buried up to the neck in English
newspapers and books from which 1 am compiling my book on the condition
of English proletarians”, he informed Marx on November 19, i844. In
January 1845 the work was appreciably advanced and, informing Marx of
this on January 20, Engels told him of his intention to start, once it
was finished, on a new work: _On the Historical Development of England
and English Socialism_. In mid-March 1845 the manuscript was completed
and sent to the Leipzig publisher Wigand. It appeared at the beginning
of June 1845, when Engels had already moved to Brussels, where Marx,
banished from France, had been since February of that year.

The response in the German press was lively. Many newspapers and
journals, in particular the _Allgemeine_ _Preussische Zeitung_, the
_Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung_, the _Janus_. _Jahrbücher deutscher
Gesinnung, Bildung und That_, I845, the _Gesellschaftsspiegel,_ jg.
1845, and a number of others carried reviews of the book. And in
socialist circles it was received with great approval. Weydemeyer wrote
that Engels’ book was “without doubt one of the most important phenomena
in our recent literature” (“Dies Buch gehört dem Volke”, 1845). O.
Lüning noted that the book instilled not only “hatred of and wrath
against the oppressors”, but also “a feeling of hope and faith in the
final victory of reason and justice, in the eternal reason of mankind,
which, despite all dangers and storms, will secure a beautiful future”
(_Deutsches Bürgerbuch für 1846_). Revolutionary workers were educated
on Engels’ book. F. Lessner, a German worker who subsequently became an
active member of the Communist League, recalled, for example, that it
“was the first book 1 acquired and from which 1 first obtained an idea
of the working-class movement”.

Bourgeois critics, while acknowledging the accurate observation and the
literary merit of the book, nevertheless deplored its revolutionary
conclusions. Thus, in a review of recent literature published in the
Berlin journal _Janus_. _Jahrbücher deutscher Gesinnung_, in 1845 (Bd.
2, Heft 18), Professor F. A. H. Huber accused the author of making his
work “a call for murder and arson written with bile, blood and passion”.
The polemic over Engels’ book continued in the following years. For
instance, the prominent German economist B. Hildebrand devoted to its
analysis a considerable part of his work _Die Nationalökonomie oder
Gegenwart und Zukunft_, Frankfurt am Main, 1848. Acknowledging the
author’s talent and the originality of his research, this critic took
great exception to his communist ideas and declared his characterisation
of English bourgeois society to be true in detail but incorrect as a
whole.

Engels’ book became well known also outside Germany. As early as July
1845, a few weeks after it was published, reviews appeared in Russia
(_Literaturnaya Gazeta_ No. 25, July 5, 1845). Engels’ work was highly
rated by revolutionary democrats. N. V. Shelgunov, in an article
published in the journal _Sovremennik_ in 1861, demonstrated the
groundlessness of Hildebrand’s attacks on Engels, whom he called “one of
the best and noblest of Germans”. The article summarised with approval
the main content of Engels’ work (_Sovremennik_, LXXXV, Sec. 1).

Marx, in his own economic researches, based himself in many respects on
the material and conclusions of his friend’s work, which he quoted in
many passages of _Capital._ But later, Engels himself was very critical
of his book. Acknowledging that it was written with genuinely youthful
inspiration, “freshly and passionately, with bold anticipation” (see his
letter to Marx of April 9, 1863), he at the same time found in it
certain weaknesses typical of the initial stage in the development of
scientific communism.

In later editions he took steps to warn the reader of its shortcomings.
Thus, in the Appendix to the American edition (1887), which was included
in the Preface to the English and German editions of 1892, Engels wrote:
“... This book exhibits everywhere the traces of he descent of modern
Socialism from one of its ancestors-the German philosophy. Thus great
stress is laid on the dictum that Communism is not a mere party doctrine
of the working class, but a theory compassing the emancipation of
society at large, including the capitalist class, from its present
narrow conditions. This is true enough in the abstract, but absolutely
useless, and sometimes worse, in practice. So long as the wealthy
classes not only do not feel the want of any emancipation, but
strenuously oppose the self-emancipation of the working class, so long
the social revolution will have to be prepared and fought out by the
working class alone.” Engels went on to explain why his assumption in
1845 that the social revolution in England was imminent had not been
borne out. Among the causes for this he emphasised the decline of
Chartism after 1848 and the temporary preponderance of reformist
tendencies in the English working-class movement- bred out of England’s
industrial monopoly on the world market, which had turned out to be much
more lasting than he had assumed.

The Condition _of the_ Working-Class in England had several editions
during the author’s lifetime. As early as 1848, Wigand’s publishing
house in Leipzig put out a new impression of the work, marked “Second
Edition” on the title page, although it was merely a reprint of the
first.

The book was published in English for the first time in New York in 1887
in a translation made by the American Socialist Florence
Kelley-Wischnewetzky. The American edition is the authorised one. Engels
edited the translation, made a number of changes in the text, omitted
the address “To the Working-Classes of Great-Britain” and the Preface to
the first German edition of 1845, and provided the book with the new
Preface of 1887 addressed to the American reader together with an
Afterword (the Appendix written in 1886) dealing with changes that had
since taken place in the condition of the English working class. He
included in this Afterword the text of the article “England in 1545 and
in 1885”, which he had written in 1885. The tide of the book was altered
to _The Condition of the Working-Class in England_ in 1844; in the table
of contents only the tides of the chapters were preserved, without the
enumeration of the questions discussed in them which had appeared in the
German edition of 1845 (at the same time a short subject index was
added); some drawings and the plan of Manchester were omitted, a number
of references to sources in the text were given as footnotes, etc.

The text of the American edition was reproduced almost without change in
the authorised English edition which was published in London in 1892.
Engels wrote another special Preface, including in it almost without
change the Afterword to the American edition of 1887, while the Preface
for American readers was omitted. In the same year the Dietz publishing
house in Stuttgart published the authorised second German edition, the
text of which reproduced in the main that of 1845. Engels wrote for it a
new Preface, identical on the whole with that of the 1892 English
edition, but with additions in the concluding part and a number of new
footnotes.

The present edition reproduces the English translation made by Florence
Kelley-Wischnewetzky and edited by Engels himself. This text has also
been collated with the original German edition and the major different
readings affecting the meaning are given as footnotes. Some parts of the
text which were omitted by Engels when he edited the English translation
(for instance, the address to the English reader, the Preface to the
first edition, the poem “The Steam King” by Edward Mead, the enumeration
of subjects in the table of Contents, etc.) have been restored according
to the German edition, the relevant indications being given in footnotes
or Notes at the end of the volume. The tide of the book has also been
given according to the first edition. Slips and omissions made by
Florence Wischnewetzky have been corrected; in particular, she did not
have at her disposal a number of English sources used by Engels and she
gave quotations from them in retranslation from the German (in the
American and English editions of 1887 and 1892 this was specially
mentioned in the Translator’s Note). In the present edition the texts of
English sources quoted by Engels have been given according to the
original, taking into account the author’s method of quoting
(abridgments, re-arrangement of the text, and so on). Errors in dates
and in names of persons and places have been corrected, account being
taken of the corrections introduced in the book: Engels, _The Condition
of the Working Class in England_. Translated and edited by W. 0.
Henderson and W. H. Chaloner, New York, 1958. Use has been made of some
original texts from rare sources quoted in the above-mentioned edition.

The author’s prefaces to subsequent editions and the Afterword to the
American edition of 1887 will be included in the relevant volumes of the
present edition according to the dates of their writing.

 116 The address “To the Working-Classes of Great-Britain” was written
by Engels in English with the intention, as he informed Marx in his
letter of November 19, 1844, of having it printed separately and sent to
“English party leaders, literary men and Members of Parliament”. In the
1845 and 1892 German editions of _The Condition of the Working-Class in
England_ the address was reproduced in English; it was not included in
the American (1887) and English (1892) editions. In the present volume
it is reproduced according to the German edition of 1892.

 117 Engels’ Preface to the first German edition of his book was not
reproduced in the American (1887) or the English (1892) edition.
However. it was included in the 1892 German edition. In the present
volume it is given in translation from the German editions published in
the author’s lifetime.

 118 This intention was not carried out, although in the ensuing years,
up to the beginning of the 1848 Revolution, Engels several times
returned to it. During his stay in Brussels from April 1845 to August
1846, and in the following months, which he spent in Paris, Engels
continued collecting material on England in addition to what he had
collected in the preceding years. In July and August 1845, during trips
to London and Manchester with Marx, he researched on this subject in the
libraries of those cities. Three notebooks are extant, full of
bibliographical notes and excerpts from originals (G. R. Porter, The
Progress of the Nation, Vol. III, London, 1843; N. Godwin, History of
the Commonwealth of England, Vol. I, London, 1824; T. Tooke, _A History
of Prices,_ Vol. If, London, 1838; F. M. Eden, _The State of the Poor_,
Vols. I-III, London, 1797; [J. Aikin], _A Description of the Country
from thirty to forty Miles around Manchester_, London, 1795; J.
Butterworth, _The Antiquities of the Town, and a Complete History of the
Trade of Manchester_, Manchester, 1822; J. W. Gilbart, _The History and
Principles of Banking_, London, 1834, etc. For greater detail see
_Marx/Engels, Gesamtausgabe_, Abt. 1, Bd. 4, S. 503-15). By the end of
1847 Engels’ work had apparently made considerable headway; a short
article printed on November 14 that year in the _Deutsche Brüsseler
Zeitung_, with which Engels and Marx collaborated, mentioned his
intention to put out a book under the tide _On the History of the
English Bourgeoisie_. But this plan was not carried out. Nevertheless,
in his articles and reports of those years Engels constantly touched
upon various aspects of the social and political history of England.

 119 See Note 83.

 120 See Note 79.

 121 Actually, the first iron bridge in England was built in 1779 in
Shropshire, over the Severn at Coalbrookdale. The bridge constructed
according to Thomas Paine’s design was cast near Rotherham in Yorkshire,
but never erected by Paine. Its components, however, were used to build
the second great iron bridge, over the river Wear (1796).

 122 This figure, taken from G. R. Porter’s book _The Progress of the
Nation_, Vol. 1, London, 1836 (p. 345), applies to the mid-1830s. In
Vol. III of his book, published in 1843 (_op. cit_., Vol. III, p. 86),
Porter gives a higher figure 4,877,000 tons for the use of coal in
iron-smelting in England in the forties.

 123 The Reform Act passed by the British Parliament in June 1832 was
directed against the political monopoly of the landed and finance
aristocracy, and reformed the basis of Parliamentary representation in
favour of the industrial bourgeoisie and “middle classes”. The
proletariat and sections of the petty bourgeoisie, who had provided the
main support in the preceding campaigns for reform, received no
electoral rights.

 124 The data given were taken by Engels from the _Journal of the
Statistical Society of London_; in particular, the description of
working-class districts in Westminster is based on the “Report of the
Committee of the Statistical Society of London, on the State of the
Working Classes in the Parishes of St. Margaret and St. John” (Vol. III,
1840) and the description of the district around Hanover Square on C. R.
Weld’s article: “On the condition of the working classes in the Inner
Ward of St. George’s Parish, Hanover Square” (Vol. VI, 1843). The number
of inmates in the working-class houses in the parishes of St. John and
St. Margaret is given according to the report by G. Alston quoted below.
_The Journal of the Statistical Society of London_, Vol. III gives
another figure — 16,176 persons.

 125 The report by the Rev. G. Alston, initially published in the
radical paper _The Weekly Dispatch_, was reprinted in the Chartist
newspaper _The Northern Star_. No. 338, May 4, 1844. Engels quotes from
this paper.

 126 The description was given in _The Times_, November 17, 1843, and in
_The Northern Star_. No. 315, November 25, 1843.

 127 The facts described in this and the preceding paragraph were
apparently taken from a report published in The Times, January 16 and
February 12, 1844.

 128 The data quoted were apparently taken from materials published in
_The Times_, November 24 and December 22,1843, February 5, 9, and 12,
1844, and The Northern Star, December 23 and 30, 1843.

 129 The figures were apparently taken from C. B. Fripp’s “Report of an
Inquiry into the Condition of the Working Classes of the City of
Bristol” published in the _Journal of the Statistical Society of
London_, Vol. II (1839). They are somewhat inaccurately quoted: the
2,800 families constitute 46 per cent of the Bristol working-class
families investigated who occupied only one room or part of one (the
total number investigated was 5,981).

 130 The quotation is from another ‘work by J. C. Symons, namely the
“Report from Assistant Hand-Loom Weavers’ Commissioners”, which he
compiled and which was published in Parliamentary Papers, 1839, Vol.
XLII, No. A 59, p. 5 1. The following quotation is from the book quoted
by Engels in his footnote: J. C. Symons, Arts and Artisans at Home and
Abroad, the pages being those given in the footnote.

 131 The report, quoted by Engels, of the committee elected at
Huddersfield on July 19, 1844, to investigate the town’s sanitary
conditions was printed in The Northern Star No. 352, August 10, 1844.

 132 Engels gives this name to Kersall-moor-a hill near Manchester where
the workers held meetings-by analogy with the Mons Sacer in ancient
Rome, to which, tradition has it, the plebeians withdrew in 494 B.C.
when they rose against the patricians.

 133 The data given here were taken from the article “Wild beasts and
rational beings”, published in _The Weekly Dispatch,_ May 5, 1844.

 134 The case against the eleven butchers in Manchester was tried
somewhat earlier than Engels reports from memory. A report on it was
published in _The Manchester Guardian_, May 10, 1843. The session of the
Court Leet (in the 1845 and 1892 German editions Engels calls it the
“market court”), which heard cases of this kind, took place twice a
year.

 135 _The Liverpool Mercury_ of February 9, 1844, is quoted with
considerable abridgments, and in the 1845 and 1892 German editions in
free translation. In the present edition here, as in other cases, the
abridgments have been preserved.

 136 On the changes in the length of the crisis cycles see Note 92.

 137 The report by the Rev. W. Champneys, quoted by Engels, on the
condition of the East End poor employed by the day in the London docks,
was first published in 7U _Weekly Dispatch_ and then reprinted in _The
Northern Star_ No. 338, May 4, 1844.

 138 The author presumably has in mind the _Report On the Sanitary
Condition of the Labouring Population of Great Britain_ (1842) by E.
Chadwick or Dr. T. Southwood Smith’s two reports to the Poor Law
Commissioners on sanitary conditions in the East End of London in 1838
(see, for instance, p. 339).

 139 The facts adduced here and below were apparently taken from the
article “Frightful spread of Fever from Destitution”, published in _The
Northern Star_ No. 328, February 24, 1844.

 140 ‘Me information following is taken from the article “Quarterly
Table of Mortality” (_The Manchester Guardian_ July 31, 1844),
containing tables on the number of inhabitants (in 1841) and deaths (in
1843) in several towns.

 141 R. Cowan’s article “Vital Statistics of Glasgow” was published in
the _Journal of the Statistical Society of London_, Vol. III, 1840.

 142 The _Metropolitan Buildings Act_ a special law regulating building
in London, was passed by Parliament in 1844.

 143 Engels refers to the almost complete absence in the report under
consideration of information on the textile industrial districts of
Lancashire, Cheshire and the West Riding of Yorkshire.

 144 The figures on crime quoted here and below were taken by Engels
from G. Porter’s book, _Progress of the Nation_ Vol. III, London, 1843,
Section VII, Chapter II, and from the _Journal of the Statistical
Society of London_, vol. vi, 1843 (J. Fletcher, “Progress of Crime in
the United Kingdom”).

 145 The information was taken from materials submitted by a “Deputation
of Master Manufacturers and Mill-owners in the County of Lancaster” and
published in The Manchester Guardian. May 1, 1844. The figures concern
412 firms in the industrial county of Lancaster employing 116,281
workers.

 146 Lord Ashley’s speech was apparently quoted from The Times No.
18559, March 16, 1844, p. 4.

 147 The letter quoted was printed in _The Fleet Papers_, a journal
published by R. Oastler, Vol. IV, No. 35, August 31, 1844. Engels quotes
an excerpt in German. This was re-translated from the German in the
American (1887) and the English (1892) editions, and the beginning of
the quotation was abridged and paraphrased. The beginning of the
original excerpt reads as follows: “A shot time since a friend of mine
that was out of work and who ust to work with me, at a former pearead,
but who had being out of Wark for a Long time wor Compeld to go, on what
we Labouring men Call, the tramp and having got to a place Calld Sant
Hellins (I think it is in Lonckshire) and meeting with no sucsess, he
thought that he would, bend is way towards Monchester, and just as he
was Leaving the place, he herd of one of his old mateys Leaving Close on
the way — so he resolved that he would make him out if poseble-for he
wishd to see him, thinkin that he might perhaps help him to a job, and
if not, he might give him a mouthful of something to Eat, and a nights
Lodgings, has he said he was very heard-up.”

 148 See Note 145.

 149 The _Health and Morals of Apprentices Act_ (1802) limited the
working time of child-apprentices to twelve hours and prohibited their
employment at night. This law applied only to the cotton and wool
industries; it made no provision for control by factory inspectors and
was practically disregarded by the mill-owners.

 150 R. H. Greg’s words were apparently reproduced by Engels from Lord
Ashley’s speech in the House of Commons on March 15, 1844, in support of
the Ten Hour Bill. (See _The Times_ No. 18559, March 16, 1844, p. 4.)

 151 The article mentioned, J. Roberton’s “An inquiry respecting the
period of puberty in women”, was printed in the _North of England
Medical and Surgical Journal_, Vol. I (August 1830-May 1831). Engels
possibly used the account of this article in P. Gaskell’s book, _The
Manufacturing Population of England_, London, 1833.

 152 The _Factory Act of 1819_ forbade the employment of children under
nine years of age in cotton spinning and weaving mills and also night
work of children up to sixteen; for this category the working day was
limited to twelve hours, not counting breaks for meals; since these were
arranged by mill-owners as they thought fit, the working day often
lasted fourteen hours or more.

The _Factory Act of 1825_ ruled that breaks for meals were not to total
more than 1 1/2 hours a day so that the working day would not come to
more than 12 hours. Like the Act of 1819, that of 1825 did not provide
for any control by the factory inspectors and was ignored by the
mill-owners.

 153 What is meant is the “Report from the Select Committee on the ‘Bill
to regulate the Labour of Children in the Mills and Factories of the
United Kingdom"’, 8th August, 1832 (_Parliamentary Papers_, Vol. XV,
1831-32).

 154 The reference is to “Reports of the Inspectors of Factories for the
half-year ending 31st December, 1843.”

 155 _Dissenters_ were members of Protestant religious sects and trends
in England who rejected to any extent the dogmas and rituals of the
official Anglican Church.

 156 The reference here is to the proposal made by the Peel cabinet to
lower the customs duty on sugar imported from the West Indies in order
to open the market for sugar imports from India and other countries.

 157 Engels’ prediction came true. On June 8, 1847, the Ten Hour Bill
applicable to women and youths working in factories was passed by
Parliament.

 158 What is meant is the article entitled “The Truck System
Extraordinary”, which was published in the _Halifax Guardian_, November
4, 1843. It was reprinted in 71e Sun, from which it was reproduced in
_The Northern Star_ No. 315, November 25, 1843.

 159 The poem by Edward P. Mead, “The Steam King” was printed in _The
Northern Star_ No. 274, February 11, 1843. The German translation of the
poem was made by Engels himself. The poem ends with the following two
stanzas, which Engels omitted:

The cheap bread crew will murder you
By bludgeon, ball or brand;
Then your Charter gain and the power will he vain
Of the Steam King’s bloody band.
Then down with the King, the Moloch King
And the satraps of his might:
Let right prevail, then Freedom hail
When might shall stoop to right.

 160 The first letter, published in _The Morning Chronicle_, December 1,
1843, under the tide “Distress at Hinckley”, was reprinted in The
Northern Star No. 317, December 9, 1843. Below Engels quotes also the
second letter (“Letters to the Editor”), which was published in The
Morning Chronicle, December 9, 1843.

 161 The author refers to the series of articles by Lion Faucher
published under various titles from October 1843 to July 1844, in the
journal _Revue des deux Mondes_. Later they were published by the author
in a collection under the title _Etudes sur L'Angleterre_, Vols. 1-2,
Paris, 1845. The term “_démocratie industrielle_” quoted below occurs in
Vol. 2, P. 147.

 162 The quotation given above is from the article by A. Knight, “On the
grinders’ asthma”, which was published in the _North of England Medical
and Surgical Journal_, Vol. 1, August 1830-May 183 1. The second half of
the preceding quotation is from the same source; the first half is from
Knight’s testimony to the Children’s Employment Commission (Appendix to
2nd Report, Part 1, 1842). The same publication contains extracts from
his earlier mentioned article, which were possibly used by Engels.

 163 See Note 118.

 164 See Note 79.

 165 The description of this event was taken by Engels from P. Gaskell’s
book, _The Manufacturing Population of England_, which appeared in 1833.
The author pointed out that the murderers had not been found. But soon
after the book’s publication, the murderers of mill-owner Ashton’s son —
Joseph and William Mosley and William Garside — were apprehended, and in
1834 two of them were hanged in London.

The account of the following facts is based mainly on newspaper material
(published in _The Northern Star_, The Manchester Guardian, _The Times_,
and other papers).

 166 Tradition has it that the Roman patrician Menenius Agrippa
persuaded the plebeians who had rebelled and withdrawn to the Mons Sacer
in 494 B.C. to submit by telling them the fable about the other parts of
the human body revolting against the stomach because, they said, it
consumed food and did no work, but afterwards becoming convinced that
they could not exist without it.

 167 The reference is to the rising of the Welsh miners organised by the
Chartists in Newport and its environs in November 1839. The rising was
caused by the miners’ hard condition and the growing discontent among
them over Parliament’s rejection of the Chartists’ petition and the
arrest of Chartist agitation. The Newport Rising,. possibly intended to
he the signal for a general armed struggle for the People’s Charter, was
put down by troops and used as a pretext for severe repressions. Later
Engels again returned to this rising (see p. 519 of this volume).

The events of 1843 in Manchester were reported by Engels in his article
“An English Turnout” (see pp. 584-96 of this volume).

 168 A detailed account of the strike at Birley’s mill was given in _The
Northern Star_ No. 248, August 13, 1842, p. 5.

 169 This body, better known as the _London Working-men’s Association,_
the first Chartist organisation, was formally established on June
16,1836.A project of parliamentary reform which became known as the
People’s Charter was published at the beginning of May 1838. (In all the
editions of Engels’ book which appeared during his lifetime, 1835 is
given as the year when this document was drawn up; this was probably the
result of a slip, and is corrected in the present edition.) At the
Chartist meeting in Birmingham in August 1838 it was decided to fight
for the People’s Charter to be given the force of law. This demand was
set forth in a petition to Parliament.

 170 Under a law of 1710 candidates to Parliament in borough seats had
to own landed property yielding an income of at least £300 annually and
in county seats £600 annually.

 171 The speech made by Stephens at the Chartist meeting of September
24, 1838, at Kersall-moor, near Manchester, was published in _The
Northern Star_ No. 46, September 29. Engels reproduced the relevant
passage with abridgments p. 519

 172 The author refers to the clashes between the Chartists and the
police in Sheffield, Bradford and other towns. They were said to have
been caused by provocateurs.

 173 The reference is to the _National Charter Association_, founded in
July 1840, the first mass workers’ party in the history of the
working-class movement. In the years of upsurge it counted up to 50,000
members. The work of the Association was hindered by the absence of
unity in ideas and tactics among its members and by the petty-bourgeois
ideology of, most of its leaders. After the defeat of the Chartists in
1848 the Association fell into decline and it ceased its activity in the
fifties.

 174 Engels refers here to the agrarian plant of F. O'Connor and other
Chartist leaders who shared the utopian view that the workers could be
freed from exploitation and other social evils by returning them to the
land. In 1845 the Chartist Land Co-operative Society was formed for this
purpose on the initiative of F. O'Connor (later it operated under the
name of National Land Company). It tried to buy up land with the
contributions of workmen-shareholders and to rent it out to its members
in small plots on easy terms. The scheme was not successful.

 175 Home colonies was the name given by Robert Owen and his supporters
to their model communist colonies. For details about them see Engels’
article “Description of Recently Founded Communist Colonies Still in
Existence” (pp. 214-28 of this volume).

 176 _Mechanics’ Institutes_ were evening schools in which workers were
taught general and technical subjects; such schools first appeared in
Britain in 1823, in London and Glasgow. In the early 1840s there were
over 200 of them, mainly in the factory towns of Lancashire and
Yorkshire. The bourgeoisie used these institutions to train skilled
workers for industry and to bring them under the influence of bourgeois
ideas, though initially this was resisted by the working-class
activists.

 177 The following books were published in English: [Holbach], Système
de la nature in 1817, Helvétius’ _De l'esprit_ in 1807, and _De 1'homme_
in 1777. Announcements of popular and inexpensive editions of the
classics of French philosophy were carried by the Owenites’ weekly _The
New Moral World_.

 178 The English edition of Strauss’ book _Das Leben Jesu_ was published
by Henry Hetherington in 1842 in a series of weekly instalments.

 179 It was apparently a question of Engels’ intention to give a
characterisation of English bourgeois political and economic writings in
his planned work on the social history of England. (Concerning this
intention see Note 118.)

 180 These data were given in _The Mining Journal_, Vol. 13, No. 420,
September 9, 1843.

 181 The law forbidding the employment underground of women and of
children under ten years of age was passed by Parliament on August 10,
1842, and came into force in March 1843.

 182 The _Court of Queen’s Bench_ is one of the oldest courts in
England; in the 19th century (up to 1873) it was an independent supreme
court for criminal and civil cases, competent to review the decisions of
lower judicial bodies.

A _Writ of Habeas Corpus_ is the name given in English judicial
procedure to a document enjoining the relevant authorities to present an
arrested person before a court on the demand of persons interested to
check the legitimacy of the arrest. Having considered the reasons for
the arrest, the court either frees the person arrested, sends him back
to prison or releases him on bail or guarantee. This procedure, laid
down by an- Act of Parliament of 1679, does not apply to persons accused
of high treason and can be suspended by decision of P. 542 Parliament.

 183 The speech in question was made by Thomas Duncombe in the House of
Commons on June 4, 1844. The report on it was first published in The
Times, June 5, 1844, p. 2, and later reprinted in the Chartist Northern
Star No. 343, June 8, 1844, p. 8.

 184 The reference is to the wars of the coalitions of European states
against France under the Revolution and under Napoleon, wars which
lasted from 1792 to 1815 with a short interruption in 1802-1803. Britain
was an active member of these coalitions.

 185 The facts adduced are quoted from _The Times_, June 7, 10, and 21,
1844.

 186 The quotations are from an essay by A. Somerville published in _The
Morning Chronicle_, July 6, 1843.

 187 Before the Commutation Act of 1838 Irish peasants renting land paid
tithes to the Established Church of Ireland. Under the Act of 1838 the
tithe was reduced by 25 per cent and commuted into a tax exacted from
landlords and landowners. The latter in rum transferred this tax to the
tenants, thus raising the rent.

 188 The Union of Ireland with Great Britain was imposed on Ireland by
the British Government after the suppression of the Irish rising of
1798. The Union, which entered into force on January 1, 1801, abolished
the autonomy of the Irish Parliament and made the country still more
dependent on England. The demand for the repeal of the Union became the
most popular slogan in Ireland from the 1820s. Its leader, Daniel
O'Connell, founder of the Repeal Association (1840), tried to steer the
movement toward compromise with the British ruling classes.

The agitation revived in the early 1840s.

 189 The reference is to the trial of O'Connell and eight other leaders
of the Repeal Movement in 1844. The Tory government intended by this
trial to deal it a decisive blow. O'Connell and his supporters were
sentenced to up to twelve months imprisonment in February 1844, but the
sentence was soon quashed by the House of Lords.

 190 “_Laissez-faire, laissez-aller_” was the formula of the advocates
of free trade and non-intervention of the state in economic relations.

 191 See Note 71.

 192 A considerable number of the facts adduced here were taken from The
Northern Star. Engels made use, in particular, of the following articles
and reports: “Brutality at a Workhouse”, No. 295, July 8, 1843; “Inhuman
Conduct of the Master of a Union Workhouse"’, No. 334, April 6, 1844;
“Murder! Hellish Treatment of the Poor in the Coventry Bastille”, No.
315, November 25, 1843; “Atrocities at the Birmingham Workhouse”, No.
317, December 9, 1843; “Secrets of the Union Workhouse”, No. 326,
February 10, 1844; “St. Pancras Scoundrelism Again!”, No. 328, February
24, 1844; “Infamous Treatment of an Englishman and his Family in
Bethnal-Green Workhouse”. No. 333, March 30, 1844; “Infernal Workhouse
Cruelties”, No. 359, September 28, 1844; “The Poor Laws.-Disgusting
Treatment of the Poor”, No. 328, February 24, 1844; “Horrible Profligacy
in the West London Union Workhouse”, No. 334, April 6, 1844.

 193 The reference is to the article by Douglas Jerrold “The Two
Windows”, published in _The Illuminated Magazine_, Vol. III,
May-October, 1844. .

 194 The Gilbert Act of 1782 was one of the Poor Laws. It authorised the
formation, on the demand of the rate-payers paying two-thirds of the
value of rates, in any parish or group of parishes, of a Board of
Guardians to control poor relief. However, unlike the workhouses of the
New Poor Law of 1834, which were also administered by Boards of
Guardians, the workhouses in “Gilbert Unions” contained only the
impotent poor and pauper children. The Gilbert Act was not finally
repealed until the early 1870s.

 195 _Barmecide feast_ — an expression taken from “The Arabian Nights”.
One of the, Barmaks, a noble Persian family, derided a hungry beggar by
telling him of an imaginary banquet. The expression was used by T.
Carlyle in his Chartism, the first edition of which appeared in 1840,
which is what Engels here alludes to.

 196 Quoted from _The Northern Star_. No. 344, June 15, 1844. In an
article headlined “Horrible Condition of the Agricultural Labourers” it
reproduced with a commentary material on the occurrence which was
published in _The Times,_ June 7, 1844, under the title “Effect of the
New Poor Law upon Wages”.

 197 This article was written by Engels in the spring and summer of 1845
after he had completed _The Condition of the Working-Class in England_
and moved to Brussels. Judging by the title and subtitle, which is
numbered 1, and by the first paragraph, it was intended as the beginning
of a series to supplement _The Condition of the Working-Class in
England_ with concrete illustrations. The article was published in the
January and February issues of the journal _Das Westphälische Dampfboot_
in 1846. However, the continuation did not follow and the article was
not included by Engels in any of the editions of _The Condition of the
Working-Class in England_ published during his lifetime. It was first
published in English in 1958 as an Appendix to the book: Engels. _The
Condition of the Working-Class in England_. Translated and edited by W.
O. Henderson and W. H. Chaloner, New York, 1958. Engels wrote this
article basing himself mainly on material published in The Northern Star
Nos. 362-369, 371, 372, 375 from November 1844 to January 1845, which
carried detailed reports on the strike described.

 198 _Van Diemen’s Land_ — the name initially given by Europeans to the
island of Tasmania, which was a British penal colony up to 1853.

 199 These words were taken from a resolution passed by a meeting of
workers at Ashton-under-Lyne on August 9, 1842, which decided on the
action at Manchester.

 200 According to a report published by _The Manchester Guardian_ on
December 24, 1844, the strike of the Pauling and Henfrey building
workers ended the day before. The report admitted that the firm was
forced to promise to observe the same working conditions as operated on
the other building sites of the city.

 201 This work was written by Marx to expose certain repulsive aspects
of bourgeois society, its morals and customs, using documentary evidence
provided by one of its representatives, the French jurist and economist,
custodian of the Paris police archives, Jacques Peuchet. Marx carried
out his intention by translating into German and publishing excerpts
from _Mémoires tirés des archives de La police de Paris, pour servir à
1'histoire de la morale et de la police, depuis Louis XIV jusqu'à nos
jours_. Par 1. Peuchet, Archiviste de la Police. T. I-IV, Paris, 1838,
giving his own comments’ in an introductory section and occasional
digressions. The excerpts were taken from Chapter LVIII “_Du suicide et
de ses causes_” (t. IV, pp. 116-82). Marx gives the text with
abridgments and sometimes in free rendering, without indicating by
suspension periods the passages omitted. He left out altogether the
material on pages 143-68, taking only a few phrases (see pp. 159 and
164), which he joined according to the sense to the excerpts from the
beginning of the section. Some passages from Peuchet were given by Marx
in his own formulation, emphasising their critical trend. The
information on the author given by Marx in the introductory section was
taken from the Introduction by A. Levasseur, the editor of the
_Mémoires_ (t. 1, Introduction, pp. i-xx).

In the present edition Marx’s own text (introductory and closing
sections and the digressions in which he sums up) are printed in larger
type and the excerpts from Peuchet’s book in small type. Cases of
substantial paraphrasing and other digressions from the original as well
as re-arrangements made by Marx in quoting are pointed out in footnotes.
The emphasis in the quotations is Marx’s in all cases.

 202 The Hundred Days is the second period of Napoleon’s rule, from his
restoration to the imperial throne on March 20 (after his return from
the island of Elba) to his second abdication on June 22, 1815, four days
after his defeat at Waterloo.

 203 See Note 1 00.

 204 The translation of the fragment from the manuscript of Charles
Fourier was made by Engels as a first contribution to the plan which he
and Marx had formed at the beginning of 1845 to publish in Germany a
“Library of the Best Foreign Socialist Writers” with a general
introduction and commentaries to each issue (see Engels’ letters to Marx
of February 22-26, March 7 and 17, 1845). The draft plan of this
publication, drawn up by Marx (see p. 667 of this volume), shows that it
was conceived as a representative series of works of French and English
authors. But the plan was not carried out because of publishing
difficulties. The translation of a few chapters of Fourier’s _Des trois
unités externes_ was the only one carried out in the framework of the
plan. It was begun by Engels evidently after he had moved from Barmen to
Brussels in April 1845. The introduction and the conclusion were most
probably written not before August, since they were a reply to the works
of some of the “true Socialists” published at that time. Engels’
translation and commentary were not printed until the middle of 1846 (in
the annual _Deutsches Bürgerbuch für 1846)._

The fragment selected by Engels comprises the first seven chapters of
Fourier’s unfinished manuscript _Des trois unités externes_ (written,
apparently, between 1807 and 182 1), most of which was published for the
first time after the author’s death in the Fourierist journal La
Phalange, in the first two issues (January-February and March-April) of
1845. Some passages in the manuscript coincide with passages in the
first, anonymous, publication (1808) of Fourier’s work _Théorie des
quatre mouvements et des destinies grates._ In the 1845 publication of
_Des trois unités externes_ they were replaced by suspension periods and
references to pages of that work. In his translation Engels restored
these passages according to the edition of the _Théorie des quatre
mouvements_ of 1841 (in the present edition all these cases are pointed
out in the Notes).

The text of the seven chapters is given by Engels with abridgments,
omissions not always being indicated by suspension periods, and in some
cases fragments translated are joined by Engels’ insertions. Some
passages are translated with abridgments or in the form of a paraphrase,
and sometimes the content is given in Engels’ own words.

In the present edition the translation of Fourier’s manuscript is
reproduced in the form in which it was produced for publication by
Engels. All his digressions from the original have been preserved. The
whole of the translation -as distinct from Engels’ introduction and
conclusion-is printed in small type. The insertions made by Engels and
the passages given in his rendering are printed without quotes. The most
important cases of paraphrasing are pointed out in footnotes. The
italics in the quoted text are mostly by Engels.

 205 By “German theory of the very worst sort” Engels means “true
socialism”, which in 1844-45 was spreading among German intellectuals
and craftsmen. It was a mixture of the idealistic aspects of
Feuerbachianism with French utopian socialism in an emasculated form. As
a result, socialist teaching was turned into abstract sentimental
moralising divorced from real needs. The vulgarisation of the French
Utopian Socialists’ views by “true socialism”, combined with an arrogant
and deprecatory attitude towards them, was especially marked in Grün’s
book _Die soziale Bewegung in Frankreich und Belgien_ published in
Darmstadt in August 1845.

This work of Engels reflects the intention which by then had matured in
his and Marx’s minds to dissociate themselves publicly from “true
socialism” and to criticise its representatives. Marx and Engels gave a
detailed criticism of “true socialism” in _The German Ideology._

 206 Here the author has in mind Fourier’s fantastic descriptions of the
changes which according to his vision of the future were destined to
take place in nature: a change in the unpleasant taste of sea water,
which would turn into lemonade, the appearance of heat-radiating coronas
over the North and South Poles, the transformation of beasts of prey
into animals useful to man, and so on.

The _method of series_ is a method of classification typical of Fourier
and applied by him in analysing various natural and social phenomena. By
means of this method Fourier tried to develop a new social science
according to which the social and psychological factor-the attraction
and repulsion of passions-would be demonstrated as the main principle of
social development (the passions, in turn, were divided into groups or
series). In this method and its application by Fourier, unscientific and
fantastic elements were combined with rational observations and
spontaneous manifestations of dialectics.

 207 Engels included in the first section material from the introduction
(“Setting of the Question”) and from the first chapter of Fourier’s
manuscript, to which the author gave the title “Successive Series of
Trade Methods”.

The beginning of the fragments from the words “We now touch on
civilisation’s most sensitive spot” to “the mainsprings of circulation”
is taken from the _Théorie des quatre mouvements_, Paris, 1841, pp.
331-32. However, unlike the other passages which coincide textually with
passages in _Théorie des quatre mouvements_ and which were omitted in
the journal La Phalange, the text of this passage was reproduced in the
journal too.

 208 By “_ideology’ and “_ideologists” Fourier means a group of
imitators of the French philosophy of the 18th century which was headed
by the liberal thinker, economist and politician Antoine L. C. Destutt
de Tracy (1754-1836), author of the five-volume _Elements d'idéologie_,
published in 1804.

 209 At the Aachen Congress (1818) of the states of the Holy Alliance
(Britain, Austria, Prussia and Russia) the heads of the biggest banking
houses in Europe were enlisted to help work out the terms of France’s
payment of the contribution imposed on her after the defeat of Napoleon.
It was decided to carry out the credit operations for the payment of
this contribution through the English Baring Bank and the Anglo-Dutch
Hope Bank. Apparently it was these two bankers that Fourier had in mind
in this passage.

 210 _The Federates of 1815_ were volunteers who supported Napoleon
during his short period of rule in 1815, from his return from Elba till
his defeat at Waterloo (the Hundred Days).

 211 The author has in mind the bank-notes issued in France in 1716 with
the Government’s permission by a special bank founded by the adventurer
John Law, who had decamped from France in 1720 after becoming bankrupt.
As he had transferred his bank to the state beforehand, its ruin was a
concealed form of state bankruptcy.

_Assignats_ were paper money issued during the French Revolution from
December 1789 and backed by the revenue from the sale of property
confiscated from the feudal aristocracy and the church (national
estates). As a result of emissions and speculation, which were
particularly intensified after the counter-revolutionary coup in July
1794 (9 Thermidor), they quickly depreciated. In December 1796 their
issue was stopped.

 212 Fourier mistakenly attributes this operation to the Convention. It
was carried out on September 30, 1797, by the Directory-the highest
government body of the regime which replaced the Convention. The
Directory reduced the value of all state bonds by two-thirds and
recognised as payable only one-third, which received the name of
Consolidated Third.

 213 The text from the words “when a crime becomes very frequent, one
gets accustomed to it and witnesses it with indifference” to “in which
the speculator steals only half” was taken from the _Théorie des quatre
mouvements_, pp. 341-43. Subsequently, Engels follows the text published
in La Phalange.

 214 By the new French code Fourier means the _Code civile_ of Napoleon,
which was introduced in 1804.

 215 In the list of varieties of bankruptcy in Fourier’s manuscript the
names of bankrupt businessmen were given. But the publishers of the work
in _La Phalange_ omitted these, leaving in the subsequent description of
each variety only names which were imaginary or borrowed from literary
works. Engels himself points this out in a footnote (see p. 638 of this
volume). p. 625 — 216

216 An allusion to the _Disputationes de sancto matrimonii sacramento_,
by Tornas Sanchez, a Spanish Jesuit and theologian at the end of the
16th and the beginning of the 17th century. The book was notable for its
refined casuistry and, at the same time, its freedom verging on
pornography.

 217 The text from the words “Banker Dorante has two million” to the end
of point 13 (“for people who steal several millions at one go”) was
taken from the _Théorie des quatre mouvements_, pp. 343-46.

 218 The text from the words “Judas Iscariot arrives in France” to
“everybody avidly seizes the opportunity to commit a theft if it remains
unpunished” was taken from the _Théorie des quatre mouvements_, pp.
348-51.

 219 During certain Catholic services the _Blessed Sacrament_ is
solemnly carried under a portable canopy.

 220 The small town of Beaucaire in the south of France became famous
for its big annual fair.

 221 The text from the words “Scapin, a petty crook” to the end of point
34 (“after the happy issue of the first bankruptcy, he starts to think
of a new one”) was taken from the _Théorie des quatre mouvements_, pp.
346-47.

 222 The March-April issue of La Phalange carried, besides the three
chapters of _Des trois unités externes_ (Chapters VIII-X) mentioned by
Engels, also Chapters XI-XVIII (“Conclusions from What Has Been Proved
About Trade”, “The Tendency of the Trade System to Seven Monopolies”,
“On Sea Monopoly of Coarse or Destructive Hoisting”, “On the Navigation
Monopoly of a Simple United Structure”, “On the Navigation Monopoly of a
Complex United Structure”, “Conclusion on Fraudulent Trade”, “On the
Trade Unity of People of Harmonic Structure”, “On the Administrative
Unity of People of Harmonic Structure”). The text coinciding with
passages from the _Théorie des quatre mouvements_ was omitted.

 223 Engels ironically compares the picture of historic development
given by Hegel in his _Philosophie der Geschichte_ with the medieval
Christian-feudal periodisation of world history according to the four
empires: Assyrio-Babylonian, Medo-Persian, Greco-Macedonian, and Roman
(the “Roman”, in its various forms, including the Germanic Holy Roman
Empire, was supposedly to last till the end of time) According to
Hegel’s conception, world history, the basis of which is the process of
self-knowledge of the Absolute Idea or the world spirit, has gone
through three main stages, namely, the history of Asia Minor and Ancient
Egypt, the history of the Greco-Roman world, and the history of the
German peoples. The nations whose history did not fit into this
three-stage system were called “non-historical” by Hegel.

 224 See Note 83.

 225 The reference is to the project of a “Library of the Best Foreign
Socialist Writers” (see Note 89). For this purpose Marx and Engels
intended to enlist other members of the socialist movement, including M.
Hess. But the fact that the latter had meanwhile embraced “true
socialism” and become one of its spokesmen, made it practically
impossible to collaborate with him, as also with a number of other
editors and publishers of various German journals, and was one of the
reasons why the “Library” did not materialise.

 226 Engels’ contributions to _The Northern Star_ began late in 1843 and
became regular from May 1844 (see present edition, Vol. 3). However, as
a result of his departure from England in August 1844 and of his work on
_The Condition of the Working-Class_ in England, he discontinued his
reports temporarily in the late summer of 1844. In July 1845, Marx and
Engels left Brussels for England, where they spent about a month and a
half (from July 12 to August 21) in Manchester and in London; they
acquainted themselves with English social and political literature and
expanded their contacts with the working-class movement. In London, on
his way back from Manchester, Engels agreed with G. J. Harney, the
editor of The Northern Star, to resume his work with the paper. From
September 1845 up to the revolution of 1848 he regularly contributed
articles and reports on the various Continental countries and the growth
of the revolutionary, and above all, the working-class movement there.
The article “The Late Butchery at Leipzig. — The German Working Men’s
Movement” was the first in this new series of reports.

 227 The massacre at Leipzig was the shooting down of a popular
demonstration by Saxon troops in Leipzig on August 12, 1845. The
demonstration, on the occasion of a military parade welcoming the
arrival of Crown Prince Johann, was in protest against the Saxon
Government’s persecution of the “German Catholics” movement and one of
its leaders, the priest J. Ronge. The “German Catholics” movement, which
arose in a number of German states in 1844, embraced a considerable
section of the middle and petty bourgeoisie; rejecting the supremacy of
the Pope and many of the dogmas and rites of the Catholic Church, the
“German Catholics” sought to adapt Catholicism to the needs of the
developing German bourgeoisie.

_The Northern Star_ took notice several times of the events in Leipzig.
It carried information on them in Nos. 404 and 406, August 9 and 23,
1845, and in the report “Germany. The New Reformation”, published in No.
408, September 6, 1845 (Engels refers to it at the beginning and the end
of his article). The shooting in Leipzig was interpreted as a sign of
the ripening of revolution in Germany.

 228 Peterloo was the name given, by analogy with the battle of
Waterloo, to the massacre by troops on August 16, 1819, of unarmed
participants in a mass meeting in support of electoral reform at St.
Peter’s Fields, near Manchester.

 229 See Note 79.

 230 The reference is to the revolution of 1688 (the overthrow of the
Stuart dynasty and the enthronement of William III of Orange), after
which constitutional monarchy was consolidated in England on the basis
of a compromise between the landed aristocracy and the bourgeoisie.
p.-647

 231 This theme was not developed in detail at the time in Engels’
reports. He merely touched upon it in his article “'Young Germany’ in
Switzerland”, which was published in _The Northern Star_ two weeks
later, on September 27, 1845 (see pp. 651-53 of this volume).
Nevertheless Engels did not abandon his intention of describing the
development of the German working-class movement in the 1840s in the
columns of the Chartist newspaper, as is borne out by the series of
articles on “The State of Germany” which he began in October 1845 but
did not complete and carried only to the beginning of -the 1840s (see
present edition, Vol. 6).

 232 “_Young Germany_” was a revolutionary conspiratorial organisation
of German émigrés in Switzerland in the 1830s and 1840s. Initially it
comprised mainly petty-bourgeois intellectuals, whose object was to set
up a democratic republic in Germany, but soon it came more under the
influence of the trade unions and socialist clubs. In the mid-1830s, the
Swiss Government, under pressure from Austria and Prussia, deported the
German revolutionaries; the craftsmen’s unions were closed. “Young
Germany” virtually ceased to exist, though several groups of its
followers still remained in the cantons of Geneva and Vaud. In the 1840s
“Young Germany” was revived, when its members, under the influence of
Ludwig Feuerbach’s ideas, carried on mainly atheistic propaganda among
the German émigrés, sharply opposing the communist trends, especially
that of Weitling, although some of the members of “Young Germany” were
more and more attracted by social questions. In 1845 “Young, Germany”
was again crushed.

The report “On the ‘Discovery of the Conspiracy’ of ‘Young Germany"’
which is quoted by Engels in abridged form in English was published in
the _Constitutionnel Neuchâtelois_ No. 109, September 11, 1845. The
emphasis in the text is by Engels; in the newspaper only the words
“Regicide not excepted” were stressed, and they were reproduced in
italics by Engels.

 233 The reference is to the armed clash between clerical-patriarchal
elements opposed to bourgeois reforms and the democratic forces of the
Valais canton in March 1844. With the support of conservative circles in
Lucerne and other cantons, the clericals temporarily gained the upper
hand. Concerning these events see Engels’ article “The Civil War in the
Valais” (present edition, Vol. 3, p. 525).

 234 On the “German Catholics” see Note 227.

“_Friends of Light_” was a religious trend directed against the pietism
which, supported by Junker circles, was predominant in the official
church and was distinguished by its extreme reactionary and hypocritical
character. The “Friends of Light” movement was an expression of German
bourgeois discontent with the P. 653 reactionary order in Germany in the
1840s.

 235 Weitling and his supporters were arrested in June 1843 by the
Zurich authorities and put on trial for communist activity considered
dangerous to the state and public order. The trial took place in
September, and the public prosecutor failed to secure conviction on the
charge of high treason and conspiracy. Weitling was, however, condemned
to six months imprisonment for inciting to crimes against property and
insulting religion (the court of appeal, on the demand of the public
prosecutor, increased the term to ten months) and to deportation from
Switzerland; his followers were banished from the canton of Zurich.
Weitling’s trial was described by Engels in his article “Progress of
Social Reform on the Continent” (see present edition, Vol. 3, pp.
392-408).

 236 The article was sent to the Hamburg journal _Telegraph für
Deutschland_ through Reichardt’s Newspaper-Correspondence Bureau in
Brussels, which provided the progressive German press with reports by
German émigrés. Engels himself contributed to this paper only in his
younger years, from 1839 to 1841 (see present edition, Vol. 2); he
discontinued his collaboration because he was dissatisfied with the
ideological and political stand and especially the liberal half-measures
of the literary group of “Young Germany”, whose press organ this journal
was. In publishing the article the editors accompanied it with a note
revealing its source. “As the author of this interesting article,” the
note said, “we can name the well-known Engels.” In content the article
coincides in part with the corresponding passages in the chapter on the
labour movements in _The Condition of the Working-Class in England_
(characterisation of the workers’ unrest in Lancashire in summer
1842,--see pp. 520-21 of this volume), and in part supplements some
other sections of that book.

 237 What is meant is the Reform Act of 1832, see Note 123.

 238 The Bill introducing the sliding scale was drafted by Canning’s
Tory cabinet in 1827 and carried through Parliament the following year
in a Somewhat revised form by the Tory cabinet under Wellington.

 239 The _People’s Charter_, containing the demands of the Chartists,
was published on May 8, i838, as a Bill to be submitted to Parliament.
It Consisted of six points: universal suffrage (for men on reaching the
age of 21), annual elections to Parliament, secret ballot, equal
electoral areas, abolition of the property qualification for
Parliamentary candidates, a salary for Members of Parliament.

 240 Marx’s note entitled “Hegel’s Construction of the Phenomenology” is
at the beginning of his Notebook for 1844-1847 (the first of his
surviving Notebooks).

The basic ideas contained in the four points were developed in The
_Holy_ Family, in particular in the sections where, criticising the
Young Hegelians’ tendency to replace the revolutionary transformation of
existing reality by abstract theoretical criticism of what exists, Marx
showed that this tendency was based on Hegel’s idealist conception
developed in his _Phänomenologie des Geistes_ (see pp. 85-86, 195-97 of
this volume).

 241 This draft has no author’s title and is near the beginning of
Marx’s Notebook for 1844-1847. The main points of the draft coincide
with the points of the subject indexes compiled by Marx as early as the
summer of 1843 for his “Kreuznach Notebooks” on world history, including
the history of the French Revolution. In resuming his study of these
problems after his arrival in Paris in the autumn of w’ n that year,
Marx intended to write a _History of the Convent_. For this purpose he
compiled a summary of the memoirs of the Jacobin Levasseur (see present
edition, Vol. 3). The materials he collected, most of which have not
come down to us, were used in part in The Holy Family. It was probably
in connection with his plan to write a work on the French Revolution (he
did not abandon this idea even in 1845 after his expulsion from Paris to
Belgium, as is borne out by a report in the _Trier’sche Zeitung_ of
February 6, 1845) that he compiled this draft. In it Marx did not merely
reproduce the text of the subject indexes to the “Kreuznach Notebooks”,
he made a substantial addition to point 9, adding the words “the fight
for the abolition [_Aufhebung_] of the state and of bourgeois society”,
i.e., the fight to abolish the exploiter state and the whole existing
system of social-economic relations.

 242 The Plan of the “library of the Best Foreign Socialist Writers” is
in Marx’s Notebook for 1844-1847, among the notes relating to March
1845. (Concerning Marx and Engels’ intention to put out such a
publication and the causes which prevented its realisation see Note 89.)
As is seen from further entries in his Notebook, Marx returned to this
plan in the following months, recording the names of authors whose works
should be added to the “Library” (in particular the names of Thompson,
Campanella, Lamennais), and also the persons to be enlisted in the
proposed publication (M. Hess was to translate the works of Buonarroti,
Dézamy and others).

In listing the names of the Socialists Marx also mentions Lalande. This
is probably a slip of the pen. He might have meant de Labord. True,
further on in his Notebook Marx mentions Lalande’s _De L'Association,_
but in _Capital_, Vol. 1, he quotes Labord’s book _De l'esprit
d'association dans tous les intérêts de la Communauté_, Paris, 1818.

 243 See Note 41.

 244 The reference is to the _travailleurs égalitaires_ and the
_humanitaires_, see Note 68.

 245 These entries in Marx’s Notebook for 1844-1847 immediately precede
the famous “Theses on Feuerbach”, written in April 1845 (see present
edition, Vol. 5). In content the notes correspond to the first point of
the “Draft Plan for a Work on the Modern State” given above-evidence
that in the first months of his stay in Brussels Marx had not abandoned
the plan of writing a work on the French Revolution, but still could not
carry it out at that stage. The ideas briefly recorded in his notes have
much in common with a number of those developed in _The Holy Family_
(see pp. 122-28, 140-47 of this volume).

 246 This address to the readers of and contributors to the Elberfeld
journal _Gesellschaftsspiegel_ was written by Engels and Hess. Engels
took a part in preparing the publication of the journal, in drawing up
its programme, and, as is seen from his letter to Marx of January 20,
1845, in compiling the prospectus published in the first issue in the
form of this editorial address. As Engels wrote in one of his reports,
“Rapid Progress of Communism in Germany”, published in _The New Moral
World_ (see p. 234 of this volume), it was initially proposed that he
should be one of the editors. The prospectus reflected Engels’ intention
that the journal would expose the evils of the capitalist system and
defend the interests of the workers by criticising half-measures and
advocating a radical transformation of the social system. Indeed, the
concrete plan worked out by Engels for investigating the condition of
the workers corresponded in many respects with the tasks he had set
himself in writing _The Condition of the Working-Class in England_. But
at the same time, not a few abstract philanthropy sentiments in the
spirit of “true socialism”, coming from Hess, had found a place in the
prospectus. Dissatisfaction with the position adopted by Hess was
apparently one of the causes of Engels’ refusal to become one of the
editors. In the third of the mentioned reports in _The New Moral World_,
written in early April 1845, he named Hess alone as the publisher of the
_Gesellschaftsspiegel_ (see p. 240 of this volume). Under the editorship
of Hess the journal very soon departed from the line envisaged by Engels
in the prospectus and became a mouthpiece of the reformist and
sentimental ideas of “true socialism”.

 247 The reference is to the riot of the Silesian weavers. See Note 79.

 248 The reference is to the Associations for the Benefit of the Working
Classes in Germany (see Note 83). These associations are characterised
in Engels’ article “Rapid Progress of Communism in Germany” (pp. 234,
237 of this volume).

 249 Marx studied political economy from the end of 1843, and by the
spring of 1844 had set himself the task of writing a criticism of
bourgeois political economy from the standpoint of materialism and
communism; the draft “Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844” (see
present edition, Vol. 3) written at this time have reached us
incomplete. Work on _The Holy Family_ in the autumn of 1844 forced Marx
temporarily to interrupt his study of political economy; he returned to
it only in December 1844; in February 1845, just before his expulsion
from Paris, he concluded the publication contract with Leske. In
Brussels Marx continued to study English, French, German, Italian and
other economists and added to his Paris notebooks of quotations several
more notebooks. In the autumn of 1845 he again turned to other work: he
had. concluded that a criticism of political economy should be preceded
by an exposition of his new principles of general methodology and a
critical review of current philosophical doctrines, and therefore
concentrated on writing, jointly with Engels, _The German Ideology._ On
the other hand, he firmly rejected (see his letter to Leske of August 1,
1846) the publisher’s attempts to get him to adapt the projected work to
the conditions of the reactionary censorship. On September 9, 1846,
Leske informed Marx that, in view of rigorous censorship and police
persecution, he would not he able to publish his work. In February 1847
the contract was cancelled.

 250 This request was written four days after Marx’s arrival in Brussels
upon his expulsion from France by the French Government for taking part
in editing _Vorwärts!_ (see Note 87). Shortly after his arrival his wife
joined him, with their eldest daughter, Jenny, who had been born in
Paris.

Marx received no reply to his request. The Royal Belgian Government was
reluctant to grant political asylum to revolutionary émigrés. Marx was
immediately placed under secret surveillance as a “dangerous democrat
and Communist”.

 251 On March 22, 1845, Marx was summoned to the police administration
in Brussels and asked to sign an undertaking as a condition for being
allowed to stay in Brussels. Marx himself informed Heinrich Heine of
this in a letter of March 24, 1845.

 252 Marx’s two letters (October 17 and November 10, 1845) to Görtz, the
Chief Burgomaster of Trier, were connected with his attempts to obtain
the official documents required for emigration to the United States of
America. As is clear from the second document, the request was motivated
by the fact that after Marx’s arrival in Brussels the Prussian
Government, on whose insistence the French authorities had expelled him
from Paris, began to try to get him deported from Belgium too. It was
apparently in order to deprive the Prussian authorities of a formal
pretext for interfering in his affairs, that Marx went to the trouble of
requesting permission to emigrate to the U.S.A., the receipt of which
would have been equivalent to release from his obligations as a Prussian
citizen. There are no other documents to indicate that he had any
intention at the time to emigrate with his family to North America.
Regardless of the outcome of these steps, which most probably failed,
Marx officially renounced Prussian citizenship in December 1845.

 253 In 1838 Marx was excused reporting for military service in Berlin
because of a lung disease, and in 1841 he was pronounced unfit for
military service.
