[Cover]


Table Of Contents

1.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Preface to the First Edition
2.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Preface to the Second Edition
3.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: In Lieu of An Introduction
4.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Chapter 1.1, Sensations And
    Complexes Of Sensations
5.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Chapter 1.2, “The Discovery of
    the World-Elements”
6.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Chapter 1.3, The Theory of
    Knowledge of Empirio-Criticism and of Dialectical Materialism
7.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Chapter 1.4, Did Nature Exist
    Prior to Man?
8.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Chapter 1.5, Does Man Think With
    The Help of the Brain?
9.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Chapter 1.6, The Solipsism of
    Mach and Avenarius
10. Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Chapter 2.1, The
    'Thing-In-Itself,' or V. Chernov Refutes Frederick Engels
11. Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Chapter 2.
12. Lenin: 1908/mec: 3. L. Feuerbach and J. Dietzgen on the
    Thing-In-Itself
13. Lenin: 1908/mec: 4. Does Objective Truth Exist?
14. Lenin: 1908/mec: 5. Absolute and Relative Truth, or the Eclecticism
    of Engels as Discovered by A. Bogdanov
15. Lenin: 1908/mec: 6. The Criterion of Practice in the Theory of
    Knowledge
16. Lenin: 1908/mec: 1. What Is Matter? What Is Experience?
17. Lenin: 1908/mec: 2. Plekhanov's Error Concerning The Concept
    'Experience'
18. Lenin: 1908/mec: 3. Causality And Necessity In Nature
19. Lenin: 1908/mec: 4. The 'Principle Of Economy Of Thought' And The
    Problem Of The 'Unity Of The World'
20. Lenin: 1908/mec: 5. Space And Time
21. Lenin: 1908/mec: 6. Freedom and Necessity
22. Lenin: 1908/mec: 1. The Criticism of Kantianism from the Left and
    From the Right
23. Lenin: 1908/mec: 2. How the 'Empirio-Symbolist' Yushkevich Ridiculed
    the 'Empirio-Criticist' Chernov
24. Lenin: 1908/mec: 3.The Immanentists as Comrades-In-Arms of Mach and
    Avenarius
25. Lenin: 1908/mec: 4. Whither is Empirio-Criticism Tending?
26. Lenin: 1908/mec: 5. A. Bogdanov's 'Empirio-Monism'
27. Lenin: 1908/mec: 6. The 'Theory of Symbols' (or Hieroglyphs) and the
    Criticism of Helmholtz
28. Lenin: 1908/mec: 7. Two Kinds of Criticism of Dühring
29. Lenin: 1908/mec: 8. How Could J. Dietzgen Have Found Favour with the
    Reactionary Philosophers?
30. Lenin: 1908/mec: 1. The Crisis in Modern Physics
31. Lenin: 1908/mec: 2. 'Matter Has Disappeared'
32. Lenin: 1908/mec: 3. Is Motion Without Matter Conceivable?
33. Lenin: 1908/mec: 4. The Two Trends in Modern Physics and English
    Spiritualism
34. Lenin: 1908/mec: 5. The Two Trends in Modern Physics, and German
    Idealism
35. Lenin: 1908/mec: 6. The Two Trends in Modern Physics and French
    Fideism
36. Lenin: 1908/mec: 7. A Russian 'Idealist Physicist'
37. Lenin: 1908/mec: 8. The Essence and Significance of 'Physical'
    Idealism
38. Lenin: 1908/mec: 1. The Excursions of the German Empirio-Criticists
    Into The Field of the Social Sciences
39. Lenin: 1908/mec: 2. How Bogdanov Corrects and 'Develops' Marx
40. Lenin: 1908/mec: 3. Suvorov's 'Foundations Of Social Philosophy'
41. Lenin: 1908/mec: 4. Parties in Philosophy and Philosophical
    Blockheads
42. Lenin: 1908/mec: 5. Ernst Haeckel and Ernst Mach
43. Lenin: 1908/mec: Conclusion
44. Lenin: 1908/mec: Supplement to Chapter Four, SECTION I
45. References



MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM: PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


Preface to the First Edition

A number of writers, would-be Marxists, have this year undertaken a
veritable campaign against the philosophy of Marxism. In the course of
less than half a year four books devoted mainly and almost exclusively
to attacks on dialectical materialism have made their appearance. These
include first and foremost _Studies in_ [?—it would have been more
proper to say “against”] _the Philosophy of Marxism_ (St. Petersburg,
1908), a symposium by Bazarov, Bogdanov, Lunacharsky, Berman, Helfond,
Yushkevich and Suvorov; Yushkevich’s _Materialism and Critical Realism_
; Berman’s _Dialectics in the Light of the Modern Theory of Knowledge_
and Valentinov’s _The Philosophical Constructions of Marxism_.

All these people could not have been ignorant of the fact that Marx and
Engels scores of times termed their philosophical views dialectical
materialism. Yet all these people, who, despite the sharp divergence of
their political views, are united in their hostility towards dialectical
materialism, at the same time claim to be Marxists in philosophy!
Engels’ dialectics is “mysticism,” says Berman. Engels’ views have
become “antiquated,” remarks Bazarov casually, as though it were a
self-evident fact. Materialism thus appears to be refuted by our bold
warriors, who proudly allude to the “modern theory of knowledge,”
“recent philosophy” (or “recent positivism”), the “philosophy of modern
natural science,” or even the “philosophy of natural science of the
twentieth century.” Supported by all these supposedly recent doctrines,
our destroyers of dialectical materialism proceed fearlessly to
downright fideism^([1]) ^([3]) (in the case of Lunacharsky it is most
evident, but by no means in his case alone!^([4])). Yet when it comes to
an explicit definition of their attitude towards Marx and Engels, all
their courage and all their respect for their own convictions at once
disappear. In deed—a complete renunciation of dialectical materialism,
_i.e.,_ of Marxism; in word—endless subterfuges, attempts to evade the
essence of the question, to cover their retreat, to put some materialist
or other in place of materialism in general, and a determined refusal to
make a direct analysis of the innumerable materialist declarations of
Marx and Engels. This is truly “mutiny on one’s knees,” as it was justly
characterised by one Marxist. This is typical philosophical revisionism,
for it was only the revisionists who gained a sad notoriety for
themselves by their departure from the fundamental views of Marxism and
by their fear, or inability, to “settle accounts” openly, explicitly,
resolutely and clearly with the views they had abandoned. When orthodox
Marxists had occasion to pronounce against some antiquated views of Marx
(for instance, Mehring when he opposed certain historical propositions),
it was always done with such precision and thoroughness that no one has
ever found anything ambiguous in such literary utterances.

For the rest, there is in the _Studies “in” the Philosophy of Marxism_
one phrase which resembles the truth. This is Lunacharsky’s phrase:
“Perhaps we [i.e., all the collaborators of the Studies evidently]^([2])
have gone astray, but we are seeking” (p. 161). That the first half of
this phrase contains an absolute and the second a relative truth, I
shall endeavour to demonstrate circumstantially in the present book. At
the moment I would only remark that if our philosophers had spoken not
in the name of Marxism but in the name of a few “seeking” Marxists, they
would have shown more respect for themselves and for Marxism.

As for myself, I too am a “seeker” in philosophy. Namely, the task I
have set myself in these comments is to find out what was the stumbling
block to these people who under the guise of Marxism are offering
something incredibly muddled, confused and reactionary.

— Vladimir Lenin. September 1908.

Notes

[1] _Fideism_ is a doctrine which substitutes faith for knowledge, or
which generally attaches significance to faith. —_Lenin_

[2] Interpolations in square brackets (within passages quoted by Lenin)
have been introduced by Lenin, unless otherwise indicated.—_Ed_.

[3] V. I. Lenin in a letter to A. I, Ulyanova-Yelizarova, dated October
20 (November 8), 1908, wrote: “...if considerations due to the
censorship prove _very_ severe, the word ‘clericalism’ could be replaced
everywhere by the word ‘fideism’ with an explanatory note (‘fideism’ is
a doctrine which substitutes faith for knowledge, or which generally
attaches significance to faith). This is in case of need—to _explain_
the nature of the concessions which I am ready to make.” (see _Collected
Works,_ present edition, Vol. 37, p. 395). In another letter to his
sister, Lenin proposed replacing the word ‘clericalism’ by the word
‘Shamanism’, to which she answered. “It is already too late for
Shamanism. And is it really better?” (Ibid., p. 662). From the text of
the book _Materialism and Empirio-criticism_ it can be seen that the
word ‘fideism’ was substituted for ‘clericalism’, although the latter
word remained unaltered in some places. The note suggested by Lenin was
given in the first edition of the book and was retained in subsequent
editions.

[4] Lenin is referring to a religious-philosophical tendency hostile to
Marxism called “god-building”, which arose in the period of reaction
among a section of the party intellectuals who had deserted Marxism
after the defeat of the revolution of 1905–07. The “god-builders” (A. V.
Lunacharsky, V.Bazarov and others) preached the creation of a new
“socialist” religion in an attempt to—reconcile Marxism with religion.
At one time A. M. Gorky supported them.

An enlarged meeting of the editorial board of _Proletary_ (1909)
condemned “god-building” and stated in a special resolution that the
Bolshevik group has nothing in common with “such a distortion of
scientific socialism”. The reactionary nature of “god-building” was
exposed by Lenin in his work _Materialism and Empirio-criticism_ an din
his letters to Gorky of February-April 1908 and November-December 1913.



MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM: PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


Preface to the Second Edition

With the exception of a few corrections in the text, the present edition
does not differ from the previous one. I hope that, irrespective of the
dispute with the Russian “Machians,” it will prove useful as an aid to
an acquaintance with the philosophy of Marxism, dialectical materialism,
as well as with the philosophical conclusions from the recent
discoveries in natural science. As for A. A. Bogdanov’s latest works,
which I have had no opportunity to examine, the appended article by
Comrade V. I. Nevsky gives the necessary information.^([1]) Comrade V.I.
Nevsky, not only in his work as a propagandist in general, but also as
an active worker in the Party school in particular, has had ample
opportunity to convince himself that under the guise of “proletarian
culture”^([2]) A. A. Bogdanov is imparting bourgeois and reactionary
views.

— Vladimir Lenin. 2nd September, 1920.

Notes

[1] V. I. Nevsky’s article “Dialectical Materialism and the Philosophy
of Dead Reaction” was published in 1920 as an appendix to the second
edition of the book _Materialism and Empirio-criticism._

[2] A. Bogdanov put forward the idea of “proletarian culture” as early
as 1909, by which he meant that the proletariat should elaborate its
“own” culture in contradistinction to that of the past.

After the October Socialist Revolution Bogdanov and his fellow-thinkers
adopted the so-called proletarian cultrual-educational organisations
(Proletcult) as the field of their activities. With the aid of this
convenient rostrum, they began actively to propagade anti-Marxist views,
virtually denied the importance of the cultrual inheritance of the past,
and endeavoured “by laboratory methods” divorced from life to create a
culture for the proletariat, counterposing the latter to the rest of the
working people and above all to the peasantry.

Lenin waged a consistent struggle against the separatism and
sectarianism of the Proletcult and against the anti-Marxist views of its
ideologists. In 1920 the Central Committee of the Party adopted a
special decision on subordination of the activities of the Proletcult to
the People’s Commissariat for Education. In the twenties, the Proletcult
organisations began to decline and in 1932 they ceased to exist.



MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM: IN LIEU OF AN INTRODUCTION


How Certain “Marxists” in 1908 and Certain Idealists in 1710 Refuted Materialism

Anyone in the least acquainted with philosophical literature must know
that scarcely a single contemporary professor of philosophy (or of
theology) can be found who is not directly or indirectly engaged in
refuting materialism. They have declared materialism refuted a thousand
times, yet are continuing to refute it for the thousand and first time.
All our revisionists are engaged in refuting materialism, pretending,
however, that actually they are only refuting the materialist Plekhanov,
and not the materialist Engels, nor the materialist Feuerbach, nor the
materialist views of J. Dietzgen—and, moreover, that they are refuting
materialism from the standpoint of “recent” and “modern” positivism,
natural science, and so forth. Without citing quotations, which anyone
desiring to do so could cull by the hundred from the books above
mentioned, I shall refer to those arguments by which materialism is
being combated by Bazarov, Bogdanov, Yushkevich, Valentinov, Chernov [V.
Chernov, _Philosophical and Sociological Studies,_ Moscow, 1907. The
author is as ardent an adherent of Avenarius and an enemy of dialectical
materialism as Bazarov and Co.] and other Machians. I shall use this
latter term throughout as a synonym for “empirio-criticist” because it
is shorter and simpler and has already acquired rights of citizenship in
Russian literature. That Ernst Mach is the most popular representative
of empirio-criticism today is universally acknowledged in philosophical
literature, [See, for instance, Dr. Richard Hönigswald, _Ueber die Lehre
Humes von der Realität der Aussendinge [Hume’s Doctrine of the Reality
of the External World],_ Berlin, 1904, S. 26. 1 of “metaphysics”, a
double of religion (“holy matter”, as Bazarov says).] while Bogdanov’s
and Yushkevich’s departures from “pure” Machism are of absolutely
secondary importance, as will be shown later.

The materialists, we are told, recognise something unthinkable and
unknowable—“things-in-themselves”—matter “outside of experience” and
outside of our knowledge. They lapse into genuine mysticism by admitting
the existence of something beyond, something transcending the bounds of
“experience” and knowledge. When they say that matter, by acting upon
our sense-organs, produces sensations, the materialists take as their
basis the “unknown,” nothingness; for do they not themselves declare our
sensations to be the only source of knowledge? The materialists lapse
into “Kantianism” (Plekhanov, by recognising the existence of
“things-in-themselves,” _i.e., things outside of our consciousness_);
they “double” the world and preach “dualism,” for the materialists hold
that beyond the appearance there is the thing-in-itself; beyond the
immediate sense data there is something else, some fetish, an “idol,” an
absolute, a source of knowledge? The materialists lapse into
“Kantianism” (Plekhanov, by recongnising the existence of
“things-in-itself; beyond the immediate sense data there is something
else, some fetish, an “idol", an absolute, a source of “metaphysics", a
double of religion ("holy matter", as Barzarov says).

Such are the arguments levelled by the Machians against materialism, as
repeated and retold in varying keys by the afore-mentioned writers.

In order to test whether these arguments are new, and whether they are
really directed against only one Russian materialist who “lapsed into
Kantianism,” we shall give some detailed quotations from the works of an
old idealist, George Berkeley. This historical inquiry is all the more
necessary in the introduction to our comments since we shall have
frequent occasion to refer to Berkeley and his trend in philosophy, for
the Machians misrepresent both the relation of Mach to Berkeley and the
essence of Berkeley’s philosophical line.

The work of Bishop George Berkeley, published in 1710 under the title
_Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge_—^([1]) begins
with the following argument:

  “It is evident to anyone who takes a survey of the _objects_ of human
  knowledge, that they are either ideas actually imprinted on the
  senses; or else such as are perceived by attending to the passions and
  operations of the mind; or lastly, ideas formed by help of memory and
  imagination. . . . By sight I have the ideas of light and colours,
  with their several degrees and variations. By touch I perceive hard
  and soft, heat and cold, motion and resistance. . . . Smelling
  furnishes me with odours; the palate with tastes; and hearing conveys
  sounds. . . . And as several of these are observed to accompany each
  other, they come to be marked by one name, and so to be reputed as one
  thing. Thus, for example, a certain colour, taste, smell, figure and
  consistence having been observed to go together, are accounted one
  distinct thing, signified by the name apple; other collections of
  ideas constitute a stone, a tree, a book, and the like sensible
  things. . .” (§ 1).

Such is the content of the first section of Berkeley’s work. We must
remember that Berkeley takes as the basis of his philosophy “hard, soft,
heat, cold, colours, tastes, odours,” etc. For Berkeley, things are
“collections of ideas,” this expression designating the aforesaid, let
us say, qualities or sensations, and not abstract thoughts.

Berkeley goes on to say that besides these “ideas or objects of
knowledge” there exists something that perceives them—"mind, spirit,
soul or _myself_ “ (§ 2). It is self-evident, the philosopher concludes,
that “ideas” cannot exist outside of the mind that perceives them. In
order to convince ourselves of this it is enough to consider the meaning
of the word “exist.” “The table I write on I say exists, that is, I see
and feel it; and if I were out of my study I should say it existed;
meaning thereby that if I was in my study I might perceive it. . . .”
That is what Berkeley says in § 3 of his work and thereupon he begins a
polemic against the people whom he calls materialists (§§ 18, 19, etc.).
“For as to what is said of the absolute existence of unthinking things,
without any relation to their being perceived,” he says, “that is to me
perfectly unintelligible.” To exist means to be perceived ("Their _esse_
is _percipi,_” § 3—a dictum of Berkeley’s frequently quoted in textbooks
on the history of philosophy). “It is indeed an opinion strangely
prevailing amongst men, that houses, mountains, rivers, and in a word
all sensible objects have an existence, natural or real, distinct from
their being perceived by the understanding” (§ 4). This opinion is a
“manifest contradiction,” says Berkeley. “For, what are the
afore-mentioned objects but the things we perceive by sense? and what do
we perceive besides our own ideas or sensations? and is it not plainly
repugnant that any one of these, or any combination of them, should
exist unperceived?” (§ 4).

The expression “collection of ideas” Berkeley now replaces by what to
him is an equivalent expression, combination of sensations, and accuses
the materialists of a “repugnant” tendency to go still further, of
seeking some source of this complex—that is, of this combination of
sensations. In § 5 the materialists are accused of trifling with an
abstraction, for to divorce the sensation from the object, according to
Berkeley, is an empty abstraction. “In truth,” he says at the end of §
5, omitted in the second edition, “the object and the sensation are the
same thing, and cannot therefore be abstracted from each other.”
Berkeley goes on:

  “But, say you, though the ideas themselves do not exist without the
  mind, yet there may be things like them, whereof they are copies or
  resemblances; which things exist without the mind, in an unthinking
  substance. I answer, an idea can be like nothing but an idea; a colour
  or figure can be like nothing but another colour or figure. . . . I
  ask whether those supposed originals, or external things, of which our
  ideas are the pictures or representations, be themselves perceivable
  or not? If they are, then they are ideas and we have gained our point;
  but if you say they are not, I appeal to anyone whether it be sense to
  assert a colour is like something which is invisible; hard or soft,
  like something which is intangible; and so of the rest.” (§ 8).

As the reader sees, Bazarov’s “arguments” against Plekhanov concerning
the problem of whether things can exist outside of us apart from their
action on us do not differ in the least from Berkeley’s arguments
against the materialists whom he does not mention by name. Berkeley
considers the notion of the existence of “matter or corporeal substance”
(§ 9) such a “contradiction,” such an “absurdity” that it is really not
worth wasting time exposing it. He says:

  “But because the tenet of the existence of Matter seems to have taken
  so deep a root in the minds of philosophers, and draws after it so
  many ill consequences, I choose rather to be thought prolix and
  tedious than omit anything that might conduce to the full discovery
  and extirpation of that prejudice” (§ 9).

We shall presently see to what ill consequences Berkeley is referring.
Let us first finish with his theoretical arguments against the
materialists. Denying the “absolute” existence of objects, that is, the
existence of things outside human knowledge, Berkeley bluntly defines
the viewpoint of his opponents as being that they recognise the
“thing-in-itself.” In § 24 Berkeley writes in italics that the opinion
which he is refuting recognises “_the absolute existence of sensible
objects in themselves, or without the mind_” (op. cit., pp. 167-68). The
two fundamental lines of philosophical outlook are here depicted with
the straightforwardness, clarity and precision that distinguish the
classical philosophers from the inventors of “new” systems in our day.
Materialism is the recognition of “objects in themselves,” or outside
the mind; ideas and sensations are copies or images of those objects.
The opposite doctrine (idealism) claims that objects do not exist
“without the mind"; objects are “combinations of sensations.”

This was written in 1710, fourteen years before the birth of Immanuel
Kant, yet our Machians, supposedly on the basis of “recent” philosophy,
have made the discovery that the recognition of “things-in-themselves”
is a result of the infection or distortion of materialism by Kantianism!
The “new” discoveries of the Machians are the product of an astounding
ignorance of the history of the basic philosophical trends.

Their next “new” thought consists in this: that the concepts “matter” or
“substance” are remnants of old uncritical views. Mach and Avenarius,
you see, have advanced philosophical thought, deepened analysis and
eliminated these “absolutes,” “unchangeable entities,” etc. If you wish
to check such assertions with the original sources, go to Berkeley and
you will see that they are pretentious fictions. Berkeley says quite
definitely that matter is “nonentity” (§ 68), that matter is _nothing_
(§ 80). “You may,” thus Berkeley ridicules the materialists, “if so it
shall seem good, use the word ’matter’ in the same sense as other men
use ’nothing’” (op. cit., pp. 196-97). At the beginning, says Berkeley,
it was believed that colours, odours, etc., “really exist,” but
subsequently such views were renounced, and it was seen that they only
exist in dependence on our sensations. But this elimination of old
erroneous concepts was not completed; a remnant is the concept
“substance” (§ 73), which is also a “prejudice” (p. 195), and which was
finally exposed by Bishop Berkeley in 1710! In 1908 there are still wags
who seriously believe Avenarius, Petzoldt, Mach and the rest, when they
maintain that it is only “recent positivism” and “recent natural
science” which have at last succeeded in eliminating these
“metaphysical” conceptions.

These same wags (Bogdanov among them) assure their readers that it was
the new philosophy that explained the error of the “duplication of the
world” in the doctrine of the eternally refuted materialists, who speak
of some sort of a “reflection” by the human consciousness of things
existing outside the consciousness. A mass of sentimental verbiage has
been written by the above-named authors about this “duplication.” Owing
to forgetfulness or ignorance, they failed to add that these new
discoveries had already been discovered in 1710. Berkeley says:

“Our knowledge of these [i.e., ideas or things] has been very much
obscured and confounded, and we have been led into very dangerous errors
by supposing a twofold existence of the objects of sense—the one
_intelligible_ or in the mind, the other _real_ and without the mind”
_(i.e., outside consciousness)_. And Berkeley ridicules this “absurd”
notion, which admits the possibility of thinking the unthinkable! The
source of the “absurdity,” of course, follows from our supposing a
difference between “things” and “ideas” (§ 87), “the supposition of
external objects.” This same source—as discovered by Berkeley in 1710
and rediscovered by Bogdanov in 1908—engenders faith in fetishes and
idols. “The existence of Matter,” says Berkeley, “or bodies unperceived,
has not only been the main support of Atheists and Fatalists, but on the
same principle doth Idolatry likewise in all its various forms depend”
(§ 94).

Here we arrive at those “ill consequences” derived from the “absurd”
doctrine of the existence of an external world which compelled Bishop
Berkeley not only to refute this doctrine theoretically, but
passionately to persecute its adherents as enemies.

  “For as we have shown the doctrine of Matter or corporeal Substance to
  have been the main pillar and support of Scepticism, so likewise upon
  the same foundation have been raised all the impious schemes of
  Atheism and Irreligion. . . . How great a friend material substance
  has been to Atheists in all ages were needless to relate. All their
  monstrous systems have so visible and necessary a dependence on it,
  that when this cornerstone is once removed, the whole fabric cannot
  choose but fall to the ground, in so much that it is no longer worth
  while to bestow a particular consideration on the absurdities of every
  wretched sect of Atheists” (§ 92, _op. cit_., pp. 203-04).

  “Matter being once expelled out of nature drags with it so many
  sceptical and impious notions, such an incredible number of disputes
  and puzzling questions

  [“the principle of economy of thought,” discovered by Mach in the
  ’seventies, “philosophy as a conception of the world according to the
  principle of minimum expenditure of effort"—Avenarius in 1876!]

  which have been thorns in the sides of divines as well as
  philosophers, and made so much fruitless work for mankind, that if the
  arguments we have produced against it are not found equal to
  demonstration (as to me they evidently seem), yet I am sure all
  friends to knowledge, peace, and religion have reason to wish they
  were” (§ 96).

Frankly and bluntly did Bishop Berkeley argue! In our time these very
same thoughts on the “economical” elimination of “matter” from
philosophy are enveloped in a much more artful form, and confused by the
use of a “new” terminology, so that these thoughts may be taken by naïve
people for “recent” philosophy!

But Berkeley was not only candid as to the tendencies of his philosophy,
he also endeavoured to cover its idealistic nakedness, to represent it
as being free from absurdities and acceptable to “common sense.”
Instinctively defending himself against the accusation of what would
nowadays be called subjective idealism and solipsism, he says that by
our philosophy “we are not deprived of any one thing in nature” (§ 34).
Nature remains, and the distinction between realities and chimeras
remains, only “they both equally exist in the mind.”

  “I do not argue against the existence of any one thing that we can
  apprehend, either by sense or reflection. That the things I see with
  my eyes and touch with my hands do exist, really exist, I make not the
  least question. The only thing whose existence we deny is that which
  _philosophers_ [Berkeley’s italics] call Matter or corporeal
  substance. And in doing this there is no damage done to the rest of
  mankind, who, I dare say, will never miss it. . . . The Atheist indeed
  will want the colour of an empty name to support his impiety. . . .”

This thought is made still clearer in § 37, where Berkeley replies to
the charge that his philosophy destroys corporeal substance:

  “. . . if the word _substance_ be taken in the vulgar sense, for a
  _combination_ of sensible qualities, such as extension, solidity,
  weight, and the like—this we cannot be accused of taking away; but if
  it be taken in a philosophic sense, for the support of accidents or
  qualities without the mind—then indeed I acknowledge that we take it
  away, if one may be said to take away that which never had any
  existence, not even in the imagination.”

Not without good cause did the English philosopher, Fraser, an idealist
and adherent of Berkeleianism, who published Berkeley’s works and
supplied them with his own annotations designate Berkeley’s doctrine by
the term “natural realism” (op. cit., p. x). This amusing terminology
must by all means be noted, for it in fact expresses Berkeley’s
intention to counterfeit realism. In our further exposition we shall
frequently find “recent” “positivists” repeating the same stratagem or
counterfeit in a different form and in a different verbal wrapping.
Berkeley does not deny the existence of real things! Berkeley does not
go counter to the opinion of all humanity! Berkeley denies “only” the
teaching of the philosophers, _viz_., the theory of knowledge, which
seriously and resolutely takes as the foundation of all its reasoning
the recognition of the external world and the reflection thereof in the
minds of men. Berkeley does not deny natural science, which has always
adhered (mostly unconsciously) to this, _i.e., the materialist, theory
of knowledge._ We read in § 59:

  “We may, from the experience [Berkeley—a philosophy of ’pure
  experience’]^([2]) we have had of the train and succession of ideas in
  our minds . . . make . . . well-grounded predictions concerning the
  ideas we shall be affected with pursuant to a great train of actions,
  and be enabled to pass a right judgement of what would have appeared
  to us, in case we were placed in circumstances very different from
  those we are in at present. Herein consists the knowledge of nature,
  which [listen to this!] may preserve its use and certainty very
  consistently with what hath been said.”

Let us regard the external world, nature, as “a combination of
sensations” evoked in our mind by a deity. Acknowledge this and give up
searching for the “ground” of these sensations outside the mind, outside
man, and I will acknowledge within the framework of my idealist theory
of knowledge _all_ natural science and all the use and certainty of its
deductions. It is precisely this framework, and only this framework,
that I need for my deductions in favour of “peace and religion.” Such is
Berkeley’s train of thought. It correctly expresses the essence of
idealist philosophy and its social significance, and we shall encounter
it later when we come to speak of the relation of Machism to natural
science.

Let us now consider another recent discovery that was borrowed from
Bishop Berkeley in the twentieth century by the recent positivist and
critical realist, P. Yushkevich. This discovery is “empirio-symbolism.”
“Berkeley,” says Fraser “thus reverts to his favourite theory of a
Universal Naturai Symbolism” (op. cit., p. 190). Did these words not
occur in an edition of 1871, one might have suspected the English
fideist philosopher Fraser of plagiarising both the modern mathematician
and physicist Poincare and the Russian “Marxist” Yushkevich!

This theory of Berkeley’s, which threw Fraser into raptures, is set
forth by the Bishop as follows:

  “The connexion of ideas [do not forget that for Berkeley ideas and
  things are identical] does not imply the relation of _cause_ and
  _effect,_ but only of a mark or _sign_ with the thing _signified_” (§
  65). “Hence, it is evident that those things, which under the notion
  of a cause co-operating or concurring to the production of effects,
  are altogether inexplicable, and run us into great absurdities, may be
  very naturally explained . . . when they are considered only as marks
  or signs for our information” (§ 66). Of course, in the opinion of
  Berkeley and Fraser, it is no other than the deity who informs us by
  means of these “empirio-symbols.” The epistemological significance of
  _symbolism_ in Berkeley’s theory, however, consists in this, that it
  is to replace “the doctrine” which “pretends to explain things by
  corporeal causes” (§ 66).

We have before us two philosophical trends in the question of causality.
One “pretends to explain things by corporeal causes.” It is clear that
it is connected with the “doctrine of matter” refuted as an “absurdity”
by Bishop Berkeley. The other reduces the “notion of cause” to the
notion of a “mark or sign” which serves for “our information” (supplied
by God). We shall meet these two trends in a twentieth-century garb when
we analyse the attitudes of Machism and dialectical materialism to this
question.

Further, as regards the question of reality, it ought also to be
remarked that Berkeley, refusing as he does to recognise the existence
of things outside the mind, tries to find a criterion for distinguishing
between the real and the fictitious. In § 36 he says that those “ideas”
which the minds of men evoke at pleasure “are faint, weak, and unsteady
in respect to others they perceive by sense; which, being impressed upon
them according to certain rules or laws of nature, speak themselves
about the effects of a Mind more powerful and wise than human spirits.
These latter are said to have _more reality_ in them than the former; by
which is meant that they are more affecting, orderly and distinct, and
that they are not fictions of the mind perceiving them. . . .” Elsewhere
(§ 84) Berkeley tries to connect the notion of reality with the
simultaneous perception of the same sensations by many people. For
instance, how shall we resolve the question as to whether the
transformation of water into wine, of which we are being told, is real?
“If at table all who were present should see, and smell, and taste, and
drink wine, and find the effects of it, with me there could be no doubt
of its reality.” And Fraser explains: “Simultaneous perception of the
’same’. . . _sense_-ideas, by different persons, as distinguished from
purely individual consciousness of feelings and _fancies,_ is here taken
as a test of the . . . _reality_ of the former.”

From this it is evident that Berkeley’s subjective idealism is not to be
interpreted as though it ignored the distinction between individual and
collective perception. On the contrary, he attempts on the basis of this
distinction to construct a criterion of reality. Deriving “ideas” from
the action of a deity upon the human mind, Berkeley thus approaches
objective idealism: the world proves to be not my idea but the product
of a single supreme spiritual cause that creates both the “laws of
nature” and the laws distinguishing “more real” ideas from less real,
and so forth.

In another work, _The Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous_
(1713), where he endeavours to present his views in an especially
popular form, Berkeley sets forth the opposition between his doctrine
and the materialist doctrine in the following way:

  "I assert as well as you [materialists] that, since we are affected
  from without, we must allow Powers to be without, in a Being distinct
  from ourselves. . . . But then we differ as to the kind of this
  powerful being. I will have it to be Spirit, you Matter, or I know not
  what (I may add too, you know not what) third nature. . .” (op. cit.,
  p. 335).

This is the gist of the whole question; Fraser comments: according to
the materialists, sensible phenomena are due to _material substance,_ or
to some unknown “third nature"; according to Berkeley, to rational Will;
according to Hume and the Positivists, their origin is absolutely
unknown, and we can only generalise them inductively, through custom, as
facts.

Here the English Berkeleian, Fraser, approaches from his consistent
idealist standpoint the same fundamental “lines” in philosophy which
were so clearly characterised by the materialist Engels. In his work
_Ludwig Feuerbach_ Engels divides philosophers into “two great
camps"—materialists and idealists. Engels—dealing with theories of the
two trends much more developed, varied and rich in content than Fraser
dealt with—sees the fundamental distinction between them in the fact
that while for the materialists nature is primary and spirit secondary,
for the idealists the reverse is the case. In between these two camps
Engels places the adherents of Hume and Kant, who deny the possibility
of knowing the world, or at least of knowing it fully, and calls them
agnostics^([8]). In his Ludwig Feuerbach Engels applies this term only
to the adherents of Hume (those people whom Fraser calls, and who like
to call themselves, “positivists"). But in his article “On Historical
Materialism,” Engels explicitly speaks of the standpoint of “the
Neo-Kantian agnostic,"^([9])— regarding Neo-Kantianism^([10]) as a
variety of agnosticism.^([3])

We cannot dwell here on this remarkably correct and profound judgment of
Engels’ (a judgment which is shamelessly ignored by the Machians). We
shall discuss it in detail later on. For the present we shall confine
ourselves to pointing to this Marxist terminology and to this meeting of
extremes: the views of a consistent materialist and of a consistent
idealist on the fundamental philosophical trends. In order to illustrate
these trends (with which we shall constantly have to deal in our further
exposition) let us briefly note the views of outstanding philosophers of
the eighteenth century who pursued a different path from Berkeley.

Here are Hume’s arguments. In his _An Enquiry Concerning Human
Understanding,_ in the chapter (XII) on sceptical philosophy, he says:

  “It seems evident, that men are carried, by a natural instinct or
  prepossession, to repose faith in their senses; and that, without any
  reasoning, or even almost before the use of reason, we always suppose
  an external universe, which depends not on our perception, but would
  exist though we and every sensible creature were absent or
  annihilated. Even the animal creations are governed by a like opinion,
  and preserve this belief of external objects, in all their thoughts,
  designs, and actions. . . . But this universal and primary opinion of
  all men is soon destroyed by the slightest philosophy, which teaches
  us, that nothing can ever be present to the mind but an image or
  perception, and that the senses are only the inlets, through which
  these images are conveyed, without being able to produce any immediate
  intercourse between the mind and the object. The table, which we see,
  seems to diminish, as we remove farther from it: But the real table,
  which exists independent of us, suffers no alteration: It was,
  therefore, nothing but its image, which was present to the mind. These
  are the obvious dictates of reason; and no man, who reflects, ever
  doubted, that the existences, which we consider, when we say, ’this
  house,’ and ’that tree’ are nothing but perceptions in the mind. . . .
  By what argument can it be proved, that the perceptions of the mind
  must be caused by external objects, entirely different from them,
  though resembling them (if that be possible), and could not arise
  either from the energy of the mind itself, or from the suggestion of
  some invisible and unknown spirit, or from some other cause still more
  unknown to us? . . . How shall the question be determined? By
  experience surely; as all other questions of a like nature. But here
  experience is, and must be entirely silent. The mind has never
  anything present to it but the perceptions, and cannot possibly reach
  any experience of their connection with objects. This supposition of
  such a connection is, therefore, without any foundation in reasoning.
  To have recourse to the veracity of the Supreme Being, in order to
  prove the veracity of our senses, is surely making a very unexpected
  circuit . . . if the external world be once called in question, we
  shall be at a loss to find arguments, by which we may prove the
  existence of that Being, or any of his attributes.”^([4])

He says the same thing in his _Treatise of Human Nature_ (Part IV, Sec.
II, “On Scepticism Towards Sensations"): “Our perceptions are our only
objects.” (P. 281 of the French translation by Renouvier and Pillon,
1878.) By scepticism Hume means refusal to explain sensations as the
effects of objects, spirit, etc., refusal to reduce perceptions to the
external world, on the one hand, and to a deity or to an unknown spirit,
on the other. And the author of the introduction to the French
translation of Hume, F. Pillon—a philosopher of a trend akin to Mach (as
we shall see below)—justly remarks that for Hume subject and object are
reduced to “groups of various perceptions,” to “elements of
consciousness, to impressions, ideas, etc."; that the only concern
should be with the “groupings and combinations of these elements."^([5])
The English Humean, Huxley, who coined the apt and correct term
“agnosticism,” in his book on Hume also emphasises the fact that the
latter, regarding “sensations” as the “primary and irreducible states of
consciousness,” is not entirely consistent on the question how the
origin of sensations is to be explained, whether by the effect of
objects on man or by the creative power of the mind. “Realism and
idealism are equally probable hypotheses” _(i.e., for Hume_).^([6]) Hume
does not go beyond sensations. “Thus the colours red and blue, and the
odour of a rose, are simple impressions. . . . A red rose gives us a
complex impression, capable of resolution into the simple impressions of
red colour, rose-scent, and numerous others” (op. cit., pp. 64-65). Hume
admits both the “materialist position” and the “idealist position” (p.
82); the “collection of perceptions” may be generated by the Fichtean
“ego” or may be a “signification” and even a “symbol” of a “real
something.” This is how Huxley interprets Hume.

As for the materialists, here is an opinion of Berkeley given by
Diderot, the leader of the Encyclopaedists^([11]):

  “Those philosophers are called _idealists_ who, being conscious only
  of their existence and of the sensations which succeed each other
  within themselves, do not admit anything else. An extravagant system
  which, to my thinking, only the blind could have originated; a system
  which, to the shame of human intelligence and philosophy, is the most
  difficult to combat, although the most absurd of all.”^([7])

And Diderot, who came very close to the standpoint of contemporary
materialism (that arguments and syllogisms alone do not suffice to
refute idealism, and that here it is not a question for theoretical
argument), notes the similarity of the premises both of the idealist
Berkeley, and the sensationalist Condillac. In his opinion, Condillac
should have undertaken a refutation of Berkeley in order to avoid such
absurd conclusions being drawn from the treatment of sensations as the
only source of our knowledge.

In the “Conversation Between d’Alembert and Diderot,” Diderot states his
philosophical position thus:

  “. . . Suppose a piano to be endowed with the faculty of sensation and
  memory, tell me, would it not of its own accord repeat those airs
  which you have played on its keys? We are instruments endowed with
  sensation and memory. Our senses are so many keys upon which
  surrounding nature strikes and which often strike upon themselves. And
  this is all, in my opinion, that occurs in a piano organised like you
  and me.”

D’Alembert retorts that such an instrument would have to possess the
faculty of finding food for itself and of reproducing little pianos.
Undoubtedly, contends Diderot.—But take an egg:

  “This is what refutes all the schools of theology and all the temples
  on earth. What is this egg? A mass that is insensible until the embryo
  is introduced thither, and when this embryo is introduced, what is it
  then? An insensible mass, for in its turn, this embryo is only an
  inert and crude liquid. How does this mass arrive at a different
  organisation, arrive at sensibility and life? By means of heat. And
  what produces heat? Motion. . . .”

The animal that is hatched from the egg is endowed with all your
sensations; it performs all your actions.

  “Would you maintain with Descartes that this is a simple imitating
  machine? Little children will laugh at you, and the philosophers will
  reply that if this be a machine then you too are a machine. If you
  admit that the difference between these animals and you is only one of
  organisation, you will prove your common sense and sagacity, you will
  be right. But from this will follow the conclusion that refutes you;
  namely, that from inert matter organised in a certain way, impregnated
  with another bit of inert matter, by heat and motion—sensibility,
  life, memory, consciousness, emotion, and thought are generated.”

One of the two, continues Diderot, either admit some “hidden element” in
the egg, that penetrates to it in an unknown way at a certain stage of
development, an element about which it is unknown whether it occupies
space, whether it is material or whether it is created for the
purpose—which is contradictory to common sense, and leads to
inconsistencies and absurdities; or we must make “a simple supposition
which explains everything, namely, that the faculty of sensation is a
general property of matter, or a product of its organisation.” To
d’Alembert’s objection that such a supposition implies a quality which
in its essence is incompatible with matter, Diderot retorts:

  “And how do you know that the faculty of sensation is essentially
  incompatible with matter, since you do not know the essence of any
  thing at all, either of matter, or of sensation? Do you understand the
  nature of motion any better, its existence in a body, its
  communication from one body to another?”

D’Alembert:

  “Without knowing the nature of sensation, or that of matter, I see,
  however, that the faculty of sensation is a simple quality, single,
  indivisible, and incompatible with a divisible subject or substratum.”

Diderot:

  “Metaphysico-theological nonsense! What, do you not see that all
  qualities of matter, that all its forms accessible to our senses are
  in their essence indivisible? There cannot be a larger or a smaller
  degree of impenetrability. There may be half of a round body, but
  there is no half of roundness. . . . Be a physicist and admit the
  derivative character of the given effect when you see how it is
  derived, though you may be unable to explain the relation between the
  cause and the effect. Be logical and do not replace a cause that
  exists and explains everything by some other cause which it is
  impossible to conceive, and the connection of which with the effect is
  even more difficult to conceive, and which engenders an infinite
  number of difficulties without solving a single one of them.”

D’Alembert:

  “And what if I abandon this cause?”

Diderot:

  “There is only one substance in the universe, in men and in animals. A
  hand-organ is of wood, man of flesh. A finch is of flesh, and a
  musician is of flesh, but differently organised; but both are of the
  same origin, of the same formation, have the same functions and the
  same purpose.”

D’Alembert:

  “And what establishes the similarity of sounds between your two
  pianos?”

Diderot:

  “. . . The instrument endowed with the faculty of sensation, or the
  animal, has learned by experience that after a certain sound certain
  consequences follow outside of it; that other sentient instruments,
  like itself, or similar animals, approach, recede, demand, offer,
  wound, caress;—and all these consequences are associated in its memory
  and in the memory of other animals with the formation of sounds. Mark,
  in intercourse between people there is nothing beside sounds and
  actions. And to appreciate all the power of my system, mark again that
  it is faced with that same insurmountable difficulty which Berkeley
  adduced against the existence of bodies. There was a moment of
  insanity when the sentient piano imagined that it was the only piano
  in the world, and that the whole harmony of the universe resided
  within it.” [_Ibid_., Vol. II, pp. 114-18.]

This was written in 1769. And with this we shall conclude our brief
historical enquiry. We shall have more than one occasion to meet “the
insane piano” and the harmony of the universe residing within man when
we come to analyse “recent positivism.”

For the present we shall confine ourselves to one conclusion: the
“recent” Machians have not adduced a single argument against the
materialists that had not been adduced by Bishop Berkeley.

Let us mention as a curiosity that one of these Machians, Valentinov,
vaguely sensing the falsity of his position, has tried to “cover up the
traces” of his kinship with Berkeley and has done so in a rather amusing
manner. On page 150 of his book we read:

  “. . . When those who, speaking of Mach, point to Berkeley, we ask,
  which Berkeley do they mean? Do they mean the Berkeley who
  traditionally regards himself [Valentinov wishes to say who is
  regarded] as a solipsist; the Berkeley who defends the immediate
  presence and providence of the deity? Generally speaking [?], do they
  mean Berkeley, the philosophising bishop, the destroyer of atheism, or
  Berkeley, the thoughtful analyser? With Berkeley the solipsist and
  preacher of religious metaphysics Mach indeed has nothing in common.”

Valentinov is muddled; he was unable to make clear to himself why he was
obliged to defend Berkeley the “thoughtful analyser” and idealist
against the materialist Diderot. Diderot drew a clear distinction
between the fundamental philosophical trends. Valentinov confuses them,
and while doing so very amusingly tries to console us: “We would not
consider the ’kinship’ of Mach to the idealist views of Berkeley a
philosophical crime,” he says, “even if this actually were the case” (p.
149). To confound two irreconcilable fundamental trends in
philosophy—really, what “crime” is that? But that is what the whole
wisdom of Mach and Avenarius amounts to. We shall now proceed to an
examination of this wisdom.

Notes

[1] Vol. I of _Works of George Berkeley,_ edited by A. Fraser, Oxford,
1871. There is a Russian translation. —_Lenin_

[2] In his preface Fraser insists that both Berkeley and Locke “appeal
exclusively to experience” (p. 117). —_Lenin_

[3] Fr. Engels, “_Ueber historischen Materialismus,_” _Neue
Zeit_,^([12]) XI. Jg., Bd. I (1892-93), Nr. 1, S. 18. Translated from
the English by Engels himself. The Russian translation in _Historical
Materialism_ (St. Petersburg, 1908, p. 167) is inaccurate. —_Lenin_

[4] David Hume, _An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. Essays and
Treatises,_ London, 1882, Vol. II, pp. 124-26. —_Lenin_

[5] _Psychologie de Hume_. _Traité de la nature humaine, etc_. Trad. par
Ch. Renouvier et F. Pillon _[Hume’s Psycbology_. _A Treatise of Human
Nature,_ translated by Ch. Renouvier and F. Pillon], Paris, 1878.
Introduction, p. x. —_Lenin_

[6] Th. Huxley, _Hume,_ London, 1879, p. 74. —_Lenin_

[7] _Oeuvres complètes de Diderot,_ éd. par J. Assézat [Diderot,
_Complete Works,_ edited by Assézat], Paris, 1875, Vol. I, p. 304. 7
—_Lenin_

[8] See K. Marx and F. Engels, _Selected Works,_ Vol. II, Moscow, 1958,
pp. 369-70.

[9] See K. Marx and F. Engels, _Selected Works,_ Vol. II, Moscow, 1958,
p. 101.

[10] _Neo-Kantianism_—a reactionary trend in bourgeois philosophy
preaching subjective idealism under the slogan of a return to Kantian
philosophy. It arose in the middle of the nineteenth century in Germany,
where at this time there was an increased interest in Kantianism. In
1865 Otto Liebinann’s book _Kant and, the Epigones_ was published, each
chapter ending with the call: “Back to Kant”. Liebmana put forward the
task of correcting Kant’s Drain error "—tue recognition of
“things-in-themselves”. ’the revival of Kantianism was helped by the
wurks of Kuno Fischer and Eduard Zeller, and one of the early
representatives of neo-Kantianism was Friedrich Albert Lange who tried
to use physiology as a basis for agnosticism.

Later, two main schools of Neo-Kantianism were formed: that of Marburg
(I-icrmann Cohen, Paul Natorp, etc.) and that of Freiburg or Baden
(Wilhelm XVindelband, 1-leinrich Riekert, etc). The former tried to
substantiate idealism by speculating on the successes of natural
science, especially on the penetration of mathematical methods into
physics; the latter counterposed the social sciences to natural science,
trying to prove that historical phenomena are strictly individual and
not subject to the operation of any laws. Both schools put the question
of the logical basis of science in place of the fundamental question of
philosophy. Criticising Kant ’from the right ", the neo-Kantians
declared the ’thing-in-itself" to be a “limiting concept” to which
knowledge was tending. Denying the objective existence of the material
world, they regarded as the object of knowledge not the laws of nature
and society, but merely the phenomena of consciousness In contrast to
the agnosticism of the natural scientists, that of the neo Kantians was
not “shamefaced materialism”, for it asserted the impotence of science
in regard to cognition and changes of reality. The neo-Kantians openly
attacked Marxism, counterposing to it “ethical socialism”. In accordance
with their theory of knowled2e they declared socialism to be the
“ethical ideal” of human social existence, an ideal to which mankind was
striving but which it could not attain. This “theory” of the
neo-Kantians was seized upon by the revisionists, headed by Eduard
Bernstein, who put forward the slogan: “The movement is everything, the
final goal is nothing”, Neo-Kantianism was one of the philosophical
pillars of the Second International. In Russia attempts to "combine
neo-Kantianism and Marxism were made by the “legal Marxists” G. V.
Plekhanov, Paul Lafargue and Franz Mehring opposed the neo-Kantian
revision of Marxism. Lenin laid bare the reactionary nature of
neo-Kantianism and showed its connection with other trends of bourgeois
philosophy (immanentism, Machism, pragmatism, etc.).

[11] The _Encyclopaedists_—a group of philosophers natural scientists
and publicists of the French Enlightenment hi the eighteenth century who
joined in publishing the _Encyclopédie ou dictionnaire raisonné des
sciences, des arts et des métiers (Encyclopaedia or Es—planotory
Dictionary of the_ Sciences, _Arts and Professions)_ (1751. 80). It was
organised and led by Penis Diderot, whose closest assistant was Jean le
Rond d ’Alembert. Paul Henri Holbach, Claude Adrien Helvetius and
Voltaire actively assisted in publishing the _Encyclopaedia_ and Jean
Jacques Rousseau contributed to the first volumes.

[12] _Die Neue Zeit (New Times)—the_ theoretical magazine of the German
Social-Democratic Party, published in Stuttgart, _1883-_ 1923. Until
October 1917 it was edited by Karl Kautsky, after that by Heinrich
Currow. Several works by Marx and Engels were published for the first
time in _Neue Zeit,_ e.g., K. Marx’s _Critiquu of the Gotha Programme,_
F. Engels’ _Contribution to the Critique of the Social-Democratic Draft
Programme of 1891_ and others. Engels constantly helped the editors of
the magazine by his advice and often criticised it for allowing
departures from Marxism to bc published in it. Contributors to _Neue
Zeit_ included outstanding leaders of the German and international
workers’ movement at the turn of the century: August Bebel. Wilhelm
Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemnburg, Franz Mebring, Clara Zetkin, G. V.
Plokhanov, Paul Lafargue and others. From the second half of the
nineties onwards, after the death of Engels, the magazine began
systematically publishing articles by revisionists including a series of
articles by Eduard Bernstein, “Problems of Socialism”, which marked the
opening of a campaign of the revisionists against Marxism. During the
First World War, the magazine adopted a Centrist position, in effect
supporting the social-chauvinists.

The Encyclopaedists were the ideologists of the revolutionary
bourgeoisie and they played a decisive part in the ideological
preparation for the eighteenth-century bourgeois revolution in France.



MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM: CHAPTER 1.1, SENSATIONS AND COMPLEXES OF SENSATIONS


Sensations And Complexes Of Sensations

The fundamental premises of the theory of knowledge of Mach and
Avenarius are frankly, simply and clearly expounded by them in their
early philosophical works. To these works we shall now turn, postponing
for later treatment an examination of the corrections and emendations
subsequently made by these writers.

Mach wrote in 1872:

  “The task of science can only be:

  1.  To determine the laws of connection of ideas (Psychology).
  2.  To discover the laws of connection of sensations (Physics).
  3.  To explain the laws of connection between sensations and ideas
      (Psycho-physics).”^([1])

This is quite clear.

The subject matter of physics is the connection between sensations and
not between things or bodies, of which our sensations are the image. And
in 1883, in his _Mechanics,_ Mach repeats the same thought:

  “Sensations are not ’symbols of things.’ The ’thing’ is rather a
  mental symbol for a complex of sensations of relative stability. Not
  the things (bodies) but colours, sounds, pressures, spaces, times
  (what we usually call sensations) are the real _elements_ of the
  world.”^([2])

About this word “elements,” the fruit of twelve years of “reflection,”
we shall speak later. At present let us note that Mach explicitly states
here that things or bodies are complexes of sensations, and that he
quite clearly sets up his own philosophical point of view against the
opposite theory which holds that sensations are “symbols” of things (it
would be more correct to say images or reflections of things). The
latter theory is _philosophical materialism_. For instance, the
materialist Frederick Engels—the not unknown collaborator of Marx and a
founder of Marxism—constantly and without exception speaks in his works
of things and their mental pictures or images _(Gedanken-Abbilder),_ and
it is obvious that these mental images arise exclusively from
sensations. It would seem that this fundamental standpoint of the
“philosophy of Marxism” ought to be known to everyone who speaks of it,
and especially to anyone who comes out in print _in the name_ of this
philosophy. But because of the extraordinary confusion which our
Machians have introduced, it becomes necessary to repeat what is
generally known. We turn to the first section of _Anti-Dühring_ and
read: “. . . things and their mental images . . .”;^([3]) or to the
first section of the philosophical part, which reads:

  “But whence does thought obtain these principles _[i.e., the
  fundamental principles of all knowledge]?_ From itself? No . . . these
  forms can never be created and derived by thought out of itself, but
  only from the external world . . . the principles are not the starting
  point of the investigation [as Dühring who would be a materialist, but
  cannot consistently adhere to materialism, holds], but its final
  result; they are not applied to nature and human history, but
  abstracted from them; it is not nature and the realm of humanity which
  conform to these principles, but the principles are only valid in so
  far as they are in conformity with nature and history. That is the
  only materialistic conception of the matter, and Herr Dühring’s
  contrary conception is idealistic, makes things stand completely on
  their heads, and fashions the real world out of ideas” _(ibid_., p.
  21).^([13])

Engels, we repeat, applies this “only materialistic conception”
everywhere and without exception, relentlessly attacking Dühring for the
least deviation from materialism to idealism. Anybody who reads
_Anti-Dühring_ and _Ludwig Feuerbach_ with the slightest care will find
scores of instances when Engels speaks of things and their reflections
in the human brain, in our consciousness, thought, etc. Engels does not
say that sensations or ideas are “symbols” of things, for consistent
materialism must here use “image,” picture, or reflection instead of
“symbol,” as we shall show in detail in the proper place. But the
question here is not of this or that formulation of materialism, but of
the opposition of materialism to idealism, of the difference between the
two fundamental _lines_ in philosophy. Are we to proceed from things to
sensation and thought? Or are we to proceed from thought and sensation
to things? The first line, i.e., the materialist line, is adopted by
Engels. The second line, i.e., the idealist line, is adopted by Mach. No
evasions, no sophisms (a multitude of which we shall yet encounter) can
remove the clear and indisputable fact that Ernst Mach’s doctrine that
things are complexes of sensations is subjective idealism and a simple
rehash of Berkeleianism. If bodies are “complexes of sensations,” as
Mach says, or “combinations of sensations,” as Berkeley said, it
inevitably follows that the whole world is but my idea. Starting from
such a premise it is impossible to arrive at the existence of other
people besides oneself: it is the purest solipsism. Much as Mach,
Avenarius, Petzoldt and the others may abjure solipsism, they cannot in
fact escape solipsism without falling into howling logical absurdities.
To make this fundamental element of the philosophy of Machism still
clearer, we shall give a few additional quotations from Mach’s works.
Here is a sample from the _Analyse der Empfindungen_^([4]); (I quote
from Kotlyar’s Russian translation, published by Skirmunt, Moscow,
1907):

  "We see a body with a point S. If we touch S, that is, bring it into
  contact with our body, we receive a prick. We can see S without
  feeling the prick. But as soon as we feel the prick we find S on the
  skin. Thus, the visible point is a permanent nucleus, to which,
  according to circumstances, the prick is attached as something
  accidental. By frequent repetitions of analogous occurrences we
  finally habituate ourselves to regard all properties of bodies as
  ’effects’ which proceed from permanent nuclei and are conveyed to _the
  self_ through the medium of the body; which effects we call
  _sensations_ . . .” (p. 20).

In other words, people “habituate” themselves to adopt the standpoint of
materialism, to regard sensations as the result of the action of bodies,
things, nature on our sense organs. This “habit,” so noxious to the
philosophical idealists (a habit acquired by all mankind and all natural
science!), is not at all to the liking of Mach, and he proceeds to
destroy it:

  “. . . Thereby, however, these nuclei are deprived of their entire
  sensible content and are converted into naked abstract symbols . . .”

An old song, most worthy Professor! This is a literal repetition of
Berkeley who said that matter is a naked abstract symbol. But it is
Ernst Mach, in fact, who goes naked, for if he does not admit that the
“sensible content” is an objective reality, existing independently of
us, there remains only a “naked abstract” _I,_ an _I_ infallibly written
with a capital letter and italicised, equal to “the insane piano, which
imagined that it was the sole existing thing in this world.” If the
“sensible content” of our sensations is not the external world then
nothing exists save this naked _I_ engaged in empty “philosophical”
acrobatics. A stupid and fruitless occupation!

  “. . . It is then correct that the world consists _only_ of our
  sensations. In which case we have knowledge only of sensations, and
  the assumption of those nuclei, and of their interaction, from which
  alone sensations proceed, turns out to be quite idle and superfluous.
  Such a view can only appeal to _half-hearted_ realism or
  _half-hearted_ criticism.”

We have quoted the sixth paragraph of Mach’s “anti-metaphysical
observations” in full. It is a sheer plagiarism on Berkeley. Not a
single idea, not a glimmer of thought, except that “we sense only our
sensations.” From which there is only one possible inference, namely,
that the “world consists only of _my_ sensations.” The word “our”
employed by Mach instead of “my” is employed illegitimately. By this
word alone Mach betrays that “half-heartedness” of which he accuses
others. For if the “assumption” of the existence of the external world
is “idle,” if the assumption that the needle exists independently of me
and that an interaction takes place between my body and the point of the
needle is really “idle and superfluous,” then primarily the “assumption”
of the existence of other people is idle and superfluous. Only I exist,
and all other people, as well as the external world, come under the
category of idle “nuclei.” Holding this point of view one cannot speak
of “_our_” sensations; and when Mach does speak of them, it is only a
betrayal of his own amazing half-heartedness. It only proves that his
philosophy is a jumble of idle and empty words in which their author
himself does not believe.

Here is a particularly graphic example of Mach’s half heartedness and
confusion. In § 6 of Chapter XI of the _Analysis of Sensations_ we read:

  “If I imagine that while I am experiencing sensations, I or someone
  else could observe my brain with all possible physical and chemical
  appliances, it would be possible to ascertain with what processes of
  the organism particular sensations are connected . . . ” (p. 197).

Very well! This means, then, that our sensations are connected with
definite processes, which take place in the organism in general, and in
our brain in particular? Yes, Mach very definitely makes this
“assumption"—it would be quite a task not to make it from the standpoint
of natural science! But is not this the very “assumption” of those very
same “nuclei and their interaction” which our philosopher declared to be
idle and superfluous? We are told that bodies are complexes of
sensations; to go beyond that, Mach assures us, to regard sensations as
a product of the action of bodies upon our sense-organs, is metaphysics,
an idle and superfluous assumption, etc., _à la_ Berkeley. But the brain
is a body. Consequently, the brain also is no more than a complex of
sensations. It follows, then, that with the help of a complex of
sensations I (and _I_ also am nothing but a complex of sensations) sense
complexes of sensations. A delightful philosophy! First sensations are
declared to be “the real elements of the world"; on this an “original”
Berkeleianism is erected—and then the very opposite view is smuggled in,
_viz_., that sensations are connected with definite processes in the
organism. Are not these “processes” connected with an exchange of matter
between the “organism” and the external world? Could this exchange of
matter take place if the sensations of the particular organism did not
give it an objectively correct idea of this external world?

Mach does not ask himself such embarrassing questions when he
mechanically jumbles fragments of Berkeleianism with the views of
natural science, which instinctively adheres to the materialist theory
of knowledge. . . . In the same paragraph Mach writes: “It is sometimes
also asked whether (inorganic) ‘matter’ experiences sensation....” Does
this mean that there is no doubt that _organic_ matter experiences
sensation? Does this mean that sensation is not something primary but
that it is one of the properties of matter? Mach skips over all the
absurdities of Berkeleianism! . . . “The question,” he avers, “is
natural enough, if we proceed from the current widespread physical
notions, according to which matter is the _immediate_ and indisputably
given _reality,_ out of which everything, inorganic and organic, is
constructed....” Let us bear in mind this truly valuable admission of
Mach’s that the current widespread _physical_ notions regard matter as
the immediate reality, and that only one variety of this reality
(organic matter) possesses the well-defined property of sensation. . . .
Mach continues:

  “Then, indeed, sensation must suddenly arise somewhere in this
  structure consisting of matter, or else have previously been present
  in the foundation. From _our_ standpoint the question is a false one.
  For us matter is not what is primarily given. Rather, what is
  primarily given are the _elements_ (which in a certain familiar
  relation are designated as sensations). . . . ”

What is primarily given, then, are sensations, although they are
“connected” only with definite processes in organic matter! And while
uttering such absurdities Mach wants to blame materialism ("the current
widespread physical notion") for leaving unanswered the question whence
sensation “arises.” This is a sample of the “refutation” of materialism
by the fideists and their hangers-on. Does any other philosophical
standpoint “solve” a problem before enough data for its solution has
been collected? Does not Mach himself say in the very same paragraph:
“So long as this problem (how far sensation extends in the organic
world) has not been solved even in a single special case, no answer to
the question is possible.”

The difference between materialism and “Machism” in this particular
question thus consists in the following. Materialism, in full agreement
with natural science, takes matter as primary and regards consciousness,
thought, sensation as secondary, because in its well-defined form
sensation is associated only with the higher forms of matter (organic
matter), while “in the foundation of the structure of matter” one can
only surmise the existence of a faculty akin to sensation. Such, for
example, is the supposition of the well-known German scientist Ernst
Haeckel, the English biologist Lloyd Morgan and others, not to speak of
Diderot’s conjecture mentioned above. Machism holds to the opposite, the
idealist point of view, and at once lands into an absurdity: since, in
the first place, sensation is taken as primary, in spite of the fact
that it is associated only with definite processes in matter organised
in a definite way; and since, in the second place, the basic premise
that bodies are complexes of sensations is violated by the assumption of
the existence of other living beings and, in general, of other
“complexes” besides the given great _I_.

The word “element,” which many naïve people (as we shall see) take to be
some sort of a new discovery, in reality only obscures the question, for
it is a meaningless term which creates the false impression that a
solution or a step forward has been achieved. This impression is a false
one, because there still remains to be investigated and reinvestigated
how matter, apparently entirely devoid of sensation, is related to
matter which, though composed of the same atoms (or electrons), is yet
endowed with a well-defined faculty of sensation. Materialism clearly
formulates the as yet unsolved problem and thereby stimulates the
attempt to solve it, to undertake further experimental investigation.
Machism, which is a species of muddled idealism, befogs the issue and
side tracks it by means of the futile verbal trick, “element.”

Here is a passage from Mach’s latest, comprehensive and conclusive
philosophical work that clearly betrays the falsity of this idealist
trick. In his _Knowledge and Error_ we read:

  “While there is no difficulty in constructing (_aufzubauen_) _every
  physical_ experience out of sensations, i.e., _psychical_ elements, it
  is impossible to imagine _(ist keine Möglichkeit abzusehen)_ how any
  _psychical_ experience can be composed _(darstellen)_ of the elements
  employed in modern physics, _i.e., mass and motion_ (in their
  rigidity—_Starrheit_—which is serviceable only for this special
  science).”^([5])

Of the rigidity of the conceptions of many modern scientists and of
their metaphysical (in the Marxist sense of the term, _i.e.,
anti-dialectical)_ views, Engels speaks repeatedly and very precisely.
We shall see later that it was just on this point that Mach went astray,
because he did not understand or did not know the relation between
relativism and dialectics. But this is not what concerns us here. It is
important for us here to note how glaringly Mach’s _idealism_ emerges,
in spite of the confused—ostensibly new—terminology. There is no
difficulty, you see, in constructing any physical element out of
sensations, _i.e., psychical_ elements! Oh yes, such constructions, of
course, are not difficult, for they are purely verbal constructions,
shallow scholasticism, serving as a loophole for fideism. It is not
surprising after this that Mach dedicates his works to the immanentists;
it is not surprising that the immanentists, who profess the most
reactionary kind of philosophical idealism, welcome Mach with open arms.
The “recent positivism” of Ernst Mach was only about two hundred years
too late. Berkeley had already sufficiently shown that “out of
sensations, i.e., _psychical elements,_” nothing can be “built” except
_solipsism_. As regards materialism, against which Mach here, too, sets
up his own views, without frankly and explicitly naming the “enemy,” we
have already seen in the case of Diderot what the real views of the
materialists are. These views do not consist in deriving sensation from
the movement of matter or in reducing sensation to the movement of
matter, but in recognising sensation as one of the properties of matter
in motion. On this question Engels shared the standpoint of Diderot.
Engels dissociated himself from the “vulgar” materialists, Vogt, Büchner
and Moleschott, for the very reason, among others, that they erred in
believing that the brain secretes thought _in the same way_ as the liver
secretes bile. But Mach, who constantly sets up his views in opposition
to materialism, ignores, of course, all the great materialists—Diderot,
Feuerbach, Marx and Engels—just as all other official professors of
official philosophy do.

In order to characterise Avenarius’ earliest and basic view, let us take
his first independent philosophical work, _Philosophy as a Conception of
the World According to the Principle of the Minimum Expenditure of
Effort_. _Prolegomena to a Critique of Pure Experience,_ which appeared
in 1876. Bogdanov in his _Empirio-Monism_ (Bk. I, 2nd ed., 1905, p. 9,
note) says that “in the development of Mach’s views, the starting point
was philosophical idealism, while a realistic tinge was characteristic
of Avenarius from the very beginning.” Bogdanov said so because he
believed what Mach said (see _Analysis of Sensations,_ Russian
translation, p. 288). Bogdanov should not have believed Mach, and his
assertion is diametrically opposed to the truth. On the contrary,
Avenarius’ idealism emerges so clearly in his work of 1876 that
Avenarius himself in 1891 was obliged to admit it. In the introduction
to _The Human Concept of the World_ Avenarius says: “He who has read my
first systematic work, _Philosophie,_ _etc_., will at once have presumed
that I would have attempted to treat the problems of a criticism of pure
experience from the ‘idealist’ standpoint” _(Der menschliche
Weltbegriff,_ 1891, Vorwort, S. ix _[The Human Concept of the World,_
1891, Foreword, p. ix]), but “the sterility of philosophical idealism
compelled me to doubt the correctness of my previous path” (p. x). This
idealist starting point of Avenarius’ is universally acknowledged in
philosophical literature. Of the French writers I shall refer to
Cauwelaert, who says that Avenarius’ philosophical standpoint in the
_Prolegomena_ is “monistic idealism.”^([6]) Of the German writers, I
shall name Rudolf Willy, Avenarius’ disciple, who says that “Avenarius
in his youth—and particularly in his work of 1876—was totally under the
spell _(ganz im Banne)_ of so-called epistemological idealism.”^([7])

And, indeed, it would be ridiculous to deny the idealism in Avenarius’
_Prolegomena,_ where he explicitly states that “_only sensation can be
thought of as the existing_” (pp. 10 and 65 of the second German
edition; all italics in quotations are ours). This is how Avenarius
himself presents the contents of § 116 of his work. Here is the
paragraph in full:

  “We have recognised that the existing _(das Seiende)_ is substance
  endowed with sensation; the substance falls away [it is “more
  economical,” don’t you see, there is “a lesser expenditure of effort”
  in thinking that there is no “substance” and that no external world
  exists!], sensation remains; we must then regard the existing as
  sensation, at the basis of which there is nothing which does not
  possess sensation _(nichts Empfindungsloses)_.”

Sensation, then, exists without “substance,” i.e., thought exists
without brain! Are there really philosophers capable of defending this
brainless philosophy? There are! Professor Richard Avenarius is one of
them. And we must pause for a while to consider this defence, difficult
though it be for a normal person to take it seriously. Here, in §§ 89
and 90 of this same work, is Avenarius’ argument:

  “. . . The proposition that motion produces sensation is based on
  apparent experience only. This experience, which includes the act of
  perception, consists, presumably, in the fact that sensation is
  generated in a certain kind of substance (brain) as a result of
  transmitted motion (excitation) and with the help of other material
  conditions _(e_._g_., blood). However—apart from the fact that such
  generation has never itself _(selbst)_ been observed—in order to
  construct the supposed experience, as an experience which is real in
  all its component parts, empirical proof, at least, is required to
  show that sensation, which assumedly is caused in a certain substance
  by transmitted motion, did not already exist in that substance in one
  way or another; so that the appearance of sensation cannot be
  conceived of in any other way than as a creative act on the part of
  the transmitted motion. Thus only by proving that where a sensation
  now appears there was none previously, not even a minimal one, would
  it be possible to establish a fact which, denoting as it does some act
  of creation, contradicts all the rest of experience and radically
  changes all the rest of our conception of nature _(Naturanschauung)_.
  But such proof is not furnished by any experience, and cannot be
  furnished by any experience; on the contrary, the notion of a state of
  a substance totally devoid of sensation which subsequently begins to
  experience sensation is only a hypothesis. But this hypothesis merely
  complicates and obscures our understanding instead of simplifying and
  clarifying it.

  Should the so-called experience, _viz_., that the sensation is
  _caused_ by a transmitted motion in a substance that begins to
  perceive from this moment, prove upon closer examination to be only
  apparent, there still remains sufficient material in the content of
  the experience to ascertain at least the relative origin of sensation
  from conditions of motion, namely, to ascertain that the sensation
  which is present, although latent or minimal, or for some other reason
  not manifest to the consciousness, becomes, owing to transmitted
  motion, released or enhanced or made manifest to the consciousness.
  However, even this bit of the remaining content of experience is only
  an appearance. Were we even by an ideal observation to trace the
  motion proceeding from the moving substance A, transmitted through a
  series of intermediate centres and reaching the substance B, which is
  endowed with sensation, we should at best find that sensation in
  substance B is developed or becomes enhanced simultaneously with the
  reception of the incoming motion—but we should not find that this
  occurred as a _consequence_ of the motion. . . .”

We have purposely quoted this refutation of materialism by Avenarius in
full, in order that the reader may see to what truly pitiful sophistries
“recent” empirio-critical philosophy resorts. We shall compare with the
argument of the idealist Avenarius the _materialist_ argument
of—Bogdanov, if only to punish Bogdanov for his betrayal of materialism!

In long bygone days, fully nine years ago, when Bogdanov was half “a
natural-historical materialist” (that is, an adherent of the materialist
theory of knowledge, to which the overwhelming majority of contemporary
scientists instinctively hold), when he was only half led astray by the
muddled Ostwald, he wrote:

  “From ancient times to the present day, descriptive psychology has
  adhered to the classification of the facts of consciousness into three
  categories: the domain of sensations and ideas, the domain of emotions
  and the domain of impulses. . . . To the first category belong the
  _images_ of phenomena of the outer or inner world, as taken by
  themselves in consciousness. . . . Such an image is called a
  ‘sensation’ if it is directly produced through the sense-organs by its
  corresponding external phenomenon.”^([8])

And a little farther on he says: “Sensation . . . arises in
consciousness as a result of a certain impulse from the external
environment transmitted by the external sense-organs” (p. 222). And
further: “Sensation is the foundation of mental life; it is its
immediate connection with the external world” (p. 240). “At each step in
the process of sensation a transformation of the energy of external
excitation into a state of consciousness takes place” (p. 133). And even
in 1905 when with the gracious assistance of Ostwald and Mach Bogdanov
had already abandoned the materialist standpoint in philosophy for the
idealist standpoint, he wrote (from forgetfulness!) in his
_Empirio-Monism_:

  “As is known, the energy of external excitation, transformed at the
  nerve-ends into a ‘telegraphic’ form of nerve current (still
  insufficiently investigated but devoid of all mysticism), first
  reaches the neurons that are located in the so-called ‘lower’
  centres—ganglial, cerebro-spinal, subcortical, etc.” (Bk. I, 2nd ed.,
  1905, p. 118.)

For every scientist who has not been led astray by professorial
philosophy, as well as for every materialist, sensation is indeed the
direct connection between consciousness and the external world; it is
the transformation of the energy of external excitation into a state of
consciousness. This transformation has been, and is, observed by each of
us a million times on every hand. The sophism of idealist philosophy
consists in the fact that it regards sensation as being not the
connection between consciousness and the external world, but a fence, a
wall, separating consciousness from the external world—not an image of
the external phenomenon corresponding to the sensation, but as the “sole
entity.” Avenarius gave but a slightly changed form to this old sophism,
which had been already worn threadbare by Bishop Berkeley. Since we do
not yet know all the conditions of the connection we are constantly
observing between sensation and matter organised in a definite way, let
us therefore acknowledge the existence of sensation alone—that is what
the sophism of Avenarius reduces itself to.

To conclude our description of the fundamental idealist premises of
empirio-criticism, we shall briefly refer to the English and French
representatives of this philosophical trend. Mach explicitly says of
Karl Pearson, the Englishman, that he (Mach) is “in agreement with his
epistemological _(erkenntniskritischen)_ views on all essential points”
_(Mechanik,_ ed. previously cited, p. ix). Pearson in turn agrees with
Mach.^([9]) For Pearson “real things” are “sense-impressions.” He
declares the recognition of things outside the boundaries of sense
impressions to be metaphysics. Pearson fights materialism with great
determination (although he does not know Feuerbach, or Marx and Engels);
his arguments do not differ from those analysed above. However, the
desire to masquerade as a materialist is so foreign to Pearson (that is
a specialty of the Russian Machians), Pearson is so—incautious, that he
invents no “new” names for his philosophy and simply declares that his
views and those of Mach are “_idealist_” _(ibid_., p. 326)! He traces
his genealogy directly to Berkeley and Hume. The philosophy of Pearson,
as we shall repeatedly find, is distinguished from that of Mach by its
far greater integrity and consistency.

Mach explicitly declares his solidarity with the French physicists,
Pierre Duhem and Henri Poincaré^([10]). We shall have occasion to deal
with the particularly confused and inconsistent philosophical views of
these writers in the chapter on the new physics. Here we shall content
ourselves with noting that for Poincaré things are “groups of
sensations”^([11]) and that a similar view is casually expressed by
Duhem.^([12])

We shall now proceed to examine how Mach and Avenarius, having admitted
the idealist character of their original views, _corrected_ them in
their subsequent works.

Notes

[1] E. Mach, _Die Geschichte und die Wurzel des Satzes von der Erhaltung
der Arbeit_. Vortrag, gehalten in der k. Böhm. Gesellschaft der
Wissenschaften am 15. Nov. 1871 _[History and Roots of the Principle of
the Conservation of Work_. A Lecture Delivered at the Bohemian Royal
Scientific Society on November 15, 1871], Prag, 1872, S. 57-58.]
—_Lenin_

[2] E. Mach, _Die Mechanik in ihrer Entwicklung historisch-kritisch
dargestellt [Mechanics,_ _a Historical and Critical Account of Its
Development],_ 3. Auflage, Leipzig, 1897, S. 473. —_Lenin_

[3] Fr. Engels, _Herrn Eugen Dührings Umwälzung der Wissenschaft [Herr
Eugen Dühring’s Revolution in Science],_ 3, Auflage, Stuttgart, 1904, S.
6. —_Lenin_

[4] Analysis of Sensations —_Lenin_

[5] E. Mach, _Erkenntnis und Irrtum,_ 2. Auflage, 1906, S. 12,
Anmerkung. 1 —_Lenin_

[6] F. Van Cauwelaert, “_L’empiriocriticisme_” [“_Empirio-Criticism_”],
in _Revue néo-scolastique,_^([14]) 1907, Feb., p. 51. —_Lenin_

[7] Rudolf Willy, _Gegen die Schulweisheit_. _Eine Kritik der
Philosophie [Against School Wisdom_. _A Critique of Philosophy],_
München. 1905. S. 170. —_Lenin_

[8] A. Bogdanov, _The Fundamental Elements of the Historical Outlook on
Nature,_ St. Petersburg, 1899, p. 216. —_Lenin_

[9] Karl Pearson, _The Grammar of Science,_ 2nd ed., London, 1900, p.
326. —_Lenin_

[10] _Analysis of Sensations,_ p. 4. Cf. Preface to _Erkenntnis und
Irrtum,_ 2nd ed. —_Lenin_

[11] Henri Poincaré, _La valeur de la science_ (_The Value of Science_),
Paris, 1905 (There is a Russian translation), _passim_. —_Lenin_

[12] P. Duhem, _La théorie physique,_ _son objet et sa structure (The
Physical Theory,_ _Its Object and Structure),_ Paris, 1906. Cf. pp. 6
and 10. —_Lenin_

[13] See F. Engels, Anti-Dürhring, Moscow, 1959, pp. 34, 53-54.

[14] Revue néo-scolastique (Neo-scholastic Review)èa heological-
philosophical magazine founded by the Catholic philosophical society in
Louvain (Belgium), published from 1894 o 1909 under the editorship of
Cardinal Mercier. It is now issued under the title of Revue
philosophique de Louvain (Philosophical Review of Louvain).



MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM: CHAPTER 1.2, “THE DISCOVERY OF THE WORLD-ELEMENTS”


“The Discovery of the World-Elements”

Such is the title under which Friedrich Adler, lecturer at the
University of Zürich, probably the only German author also anxious to
supplement Marx with Machism, writes of Mach.^([1]) And this naïve
university lecturer must be given his due: in his simplicity of heart he
does Machism more harm than good. At least, he puts the question
point-blank—did Mach really “discover the world-elements"? If so, then,
only very backward and ignorant people, of course, can still remain
materialists. Or is this discovery a return on the part of Mach to the
old philosophical errors?

We saw that Mach in 1872 and Avenarius in 1876 held a purely idealist
view; for them the world is our sensation. In 1883 Mach’s _Mechanik_
appeared, and in the preface to the first edition Mach refers to
Avenarius’ _Prolegomena,_ and greets his ideas as being “very close”
_(sehr verwandte)_ to his own philosophy. Here are the arguments in the
_Mechanik_ concerning the elements:

  “All natural science can only picture and represent _(nachbilden und
  vorbilden)_ complexes of those _elements_ which we ordinarily call
  _sensations_. It is a matter of the connection of these elements. . .
  The connection of A (heat) with B (flame) is a problem of _physics,_
  that of A and N (nerves) a problem of physiology. Neither exists
  _separately_; both exist in conjunction. Only temporarily can we
  neglect either. Even processes that are apparently purely mechanical,
  are thus always physiological” (op. cit., German ed., p. 498).

We find the same in the _Analysis of Sensations_:

  “Wherever . . . the terms ‘sensation,’ ‘complex of sensations,’ are
  used alongside of or in place of the terms ‘element,’ ‘complex of
  elements,’ it must be borne in mind that it is _only_ in this
  _connection_ [namely, in the connection of A, B, C with K, L, M, that
  is, in the connection of “complexes which we ordinarily call bodies”
  with “the complex which we call our body”] and relation, only in this
  functional dependence that the elements are _sensations_. In another
  functional dependence they are at the same time physical objects”
  (Russian translation, pp. 23 and 17).

  “A colour is a physical object when we consider its dependence, for
  instance, upon the source of illumination (other colours,
  temperatures, spaces and so forth). When we, however, consider its
  _dependence_ upon the _retina_ (the elements K, L, M), it is a
  _psychological_ object, a _sensation_” _(ibid_., p. 24).

Thus the discovery of the world-elements amounts to this:

1.  all that exists is declared to be sensation,
2.  sensations are called elements,
3.  elements are divided into the physical and the psychical; the latter
    is that which depends on the human nerves and the human organism
    generally; the former does not depend on them;
4.  the connection of physical elements and the connection of psychical
    elements, it is declared, do not exist separately from each other;
    they exist only in conjunction;
5.  it is possible only temporarily to leave one or the other connection
    out of account;
6.  the “new” theory is declared to be free from “one-sidedness.”^([2])

Indeed, it is not one-sidedness we have here, but an in coherent jumble
of antithetical philosophical points of view. Since you base yourself
only on sensations you do not correct the “one-sidedness” of your
idealism by the term “element,” but only confuse the issue and cravenly
hide from your own theory. In a word, you eliminate the antithesis
between the physical and psychical,^([3]) between materialism (which
regards nature, matter, as primary) and idealism (which regards spirit,
mind, sensation as primary); indeed, you promptly restore this
antithesis; you restore it surreptitiously, retreating from your own
fundamental premise! For, if elements are sensations, you have no right
even for a moment to accept the existence of “elements” _independently_
of my nerves and my mind. But if you do admit physical objects that are
independent of my nerves and my sensations and that cause sensation only
by acting upon my retina—you are disgracefully abandoning your
“one-sided” idealism and adopting the standpoint of “one-sided”
materialism! If colour is a sensation only depending upon the retina (as
natural science compels you to admit), then light rays, falling upon the
retina, produce the sensation of colour. This means that outside us,
independently of us and of our minds, there exists a movement of matter,
let us say of ether waves of a definite length and of a definite
velocity, which, acting upon the retina, produce in man the sensation of
a particular colour. This is precisely how natural science regards it.
It explains the sensations of various colours by the various lengths of
light-waves existing outside the human retina, outside man and
independently of him. This is materialism: matter acting upon our
sense-organs produces sensation. Sensation depends on the brain, nerves,
retina, etc., _i.e., on matter organised in a definite way._ The
existence of matter does not depend on sensation. Matter is primary.
Sensation, thought, consciousness are the supreme product of matter
organised in a particular way. Such are the views of materialism in
general, and of Marx and Engels in particular. Mach and Avenarius
_secretly_ smuggle in materialism by means of the word “element,” which
_supposedly_ frees their theory of the “one-sidedness” of subjective
idealism, _supposedly_ permits the assumption that the mental is
dependent on the retina, nerves and so forth, and the assumption that
the physical is independent of the human organism. In fact, of course,
the trick with the word “element” is a wretched sophistry, for a
materialist who reads Mach and Avenarius will immediately ask: what are
the “elements"? It would, indeed, be childish to think that one can
dispose of the fundamental philosophical trends by inventing a new word.
Either the “element” is a _sensation,_ as all empirio-criticists, Mach,
Avenarius, Petzoldt,^([4]) etc., maintain—in which case your philosophy,
gentlemen, is _idealism_ vainly seeking to hide the nakedness of its
solipsism under the cloak of a more “objective” terminology; or the
“element” is not a sensation—in which case _absolutely no thought
whatever_ is attached to the “new” term; it is merely an empty bauble.

Take Petzoldt, for instance, the last word in empirio-criticism, as V.
Lesevich, the first and most outstanding Russian empirio-criticist
describes him.^([5]) Having defined elements as sensations, he says in
the second volume of the work mentioned:

  “In the statement that ‘sensations are the elements of the world’ one
  must guard against taking the term ‘sensation’ as denoting something
  only subjective and therefore ethereal, transforming the ordinary
  picture of the world into an illusion _(Verflüchtigendes_).”^([6])

One speaks of what hurts one most! Petzoldt feels that the world
“evaporates” (_verflüchtigt sich),_ or becomes transformed into an
illusion, when sensations are regarded as world-elements. And the good
Petzoldt imagines that he helps matters by the reservation that
sensation must not be taken as something only subjective! Is this not a
ridiculous sophistry? Does it make any difference whether we “take”
sensation as sensation or whether we try to stretch the meaning of the
term? Does this do away with the fact that sensations in man are
connected with normally functioning nerves, retina, brain, etc., that
the external world exists independently of our sensations? If you are
not trying to evade the issue by a subterfuge, if you are really in
earnest in wanting to “guard” against subjectivism and solipsism, you
must above all guard against the fundamental idealist premises of your
philosophy; you must replace the idealist line of your philosophy (from
sensations to the external world) by the materialist line (from the
external world to sensations); you must abandon that empty and muddled
verbal embellishment, “element,” and simply say that colour is the
result of the action of a physical object on the retina, which is the
same as saying that sensation is a result of the action of matter on our
sense-organs.

Let us take Avenarius. The most valuable material on the question of the
“elements” is to be found in his last work (and, it might be said, the
most important for the comprehension of his philosophy), _Notes on the
Concept of the Subject of Psychology_.^([7]) The author, by the way,
here gives a very “graphic” table (Vol. XVIII, p. 410), the main part of
which we reproduce here:

  Things, or the substantial   Elements, complexes of elements: Corporeal things
  ---------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------
  Thoughts, or the mental      Incorporeal things, recollections and fantasies

Compare this with what Mach says after all his elucidation of the
“elements” _(Analysis of Sensations,_ p. 33): “It is not bodies that
produce sensations, but complexes of elements (complexes of sensations)
that make up bodies.” Here you have the “discovery of the
world-elements” that overcomes the one-sidedness of idealism and
materialism! At first we are assured that the “elements” are something
new, both physical and psychical at the same time; then a little
correction is surreptitiously inserted: instead of the crude,
materialist differentiation of matter (bodies, things) and the psychical
(sensations, recollections, fantasies) we are presented with the
doctrine of “recent positivism” regarding elements substantial and
elements mental. Adler (Fritz) did not gain very much from “the
discovery of the world-elements"!

Bogdanov, arguing against Plekhanov in 1906, wrote:

  “. . . I cannot own myself a Machian in philosophy. In the general
  philosophical conception there is only one thing I borrowed from
  Mach—the idea of the neutrality of the elements of experience in
  relation to the ‘physical’ and ‘psychical’ and the dependence of these
  characteristics solely on the _connection_ of experience.”
  _(Empirio-Monism,_ Bk. III, St. Petersburg, 1906, p. xli.)

This is as though a religious man were to say—I cannot own myself a
believer in religion, for there is “only one thing” I have borrowed from
the believers—the belief in God. This “only one thing” which Bogdanov
borrowed from Mach is the _basic error_ of Machism, the basic falsity of
its entire philosophy. Those deviations of Bogdanov’s from
empirio-criticism to which he himself attaches great significance are in
fact of entirely secondary importance and amount to nothing more than
inconsiderable private and individual differences between the various
empirio-criticists who are approved by Mach and who approve Mach (we
shall speak of this in greater detail later). Hence when Bogdanov was
annoyed at being confused with the Machians he only revealed his failure
to understand what _radically_ distinguishes materialism from what is
common to Bogdanov and to all other Machians. How Bogdanov developed,
improved or worsened Machism is not important What is important is that
he has abandoned the materialist standpoint and has thereby inevitably
condemned himself to confusion and idealist aberrations.

In 1899, as we saw, Bogdanov had the correct standpoint when he wrote:
“The image of the man before me, directly given to me by vision, is a
sensation.”^([8]) Bogdanov did not trouble to give a criticism of this
earlier position of his. He blindly believed Mach and began to repeat
after him that the “elements” of experience are neutral in relation to
the physical and psychical. “As has been established by recent
positivist philosophy,” wrote Bogdanov in Book I of _Empirio-Monism_
(2nd ed., p. 90), “the elements of psychical experience are identical
with the elements of experience in general, as they are identical with
the elements of physical experience.” Or in 1906 (Bk. III, p. xx): “as
to ‘idealism,’ can it be called idealism merely on the grounds that the
elements of ‘physical experience’ are regarded as identical with the
elements of ‘psychical experience,’ or with elementary sensations—when
this is simply an indubitable fact?”

Here we have the true source of all Bogdanov’s philosophical
misadventures, a source which he shares with the rest of the Machians.
We can and must call it idealism when “the elements of physical
experience” _(i.e., the physical, the external world, matter)_ are
regarded as identical with sensations, for this is sheer Berkeleianism.
There is not a trace here of recent philosophy, or positivist
philosophy, or of indubitable fact. It is merely an old, old idealist
sophism. And were one to ask Bogdanov how he would prove the
“indubitable fact” that the physical is identical with sensations, one
would get no other argument save the eternal refrain of the idealists: I
am aware only of my sensations; the “testimony of self-consciousness”
_(die Aussage des Selbstbewusstseins)_ of Avenarius in his _Prolegomena_
(2nd German ed., § 93, p. 56); or: “in our experience [which testifies
that “we are sentient substance”] sensation is given us with more
certainty than is substantiality” _(ibid_., § 91, p. 55), and so on and
so forth. Bogdanov (trusting Mach) accepted a reactionary philosophical
trick as an “indubitable fact.” For, indeed, not a single fact was or
could be cited which would refute the view that sensation is an image of
the external world—a view which was shared by Bogdanov in 1899 and which
is shared by natural science to this day. In his philosophical
wanderings the physicist Mach has completely strayed from the path of
“modern science.” Regarding this important circumstance, which Bogdanov
overlooked, we shall have much to say later.

One of the circumstances which helped Bogdanov to jump so quickly from
the materialism of the natural scientists to the muddled idealism of
Mach was (apart from the influence of Ostwald) Avenarius’ doctrine of
the dependent and independent series of experience. Bogdanov himself
expounds the matter in Book I of his _Empirio-Monism_ thus:

  “In so far as the data of experience appear _in dependence upon the
  state of the particular nervous system, they form the psychical world_
  of the particular person, in so far as the data of experience are
  taken _outside of such a dependence,_ we have before us the _physical
  world_. Avenarius therefore characterises these two realms of
  experience respectively as the _dependent series_ and the _independent
  series_ of experience” (p. 18).

That is just the whole trouble, the doctrine of the _independent_ (i.e.,
independent of human sensation) “series” is a surreptitious importation
of materialism, which, from the standpoint of a philosophy that
maintains that bodies are complexes of sensations, that sensations are
“identical” with physical “elements,” is illegitimate, arbitrary, and
eclectic. For once you have recognised that the source of light and
light-waves exists _independently_ of man and the human consciousness,
that colour is dependent on the action of these waves upon the retina,
you have in fact adopted the materialist standpoint and have _completely
destroyed_ all the “indubitable facts” of idealism, together with all
“the complexes of sensations,” the elements discovered by recent
positivism, and similar nonsense.

That is just the whole trouble. Bogdanov (like the rest of the Russian
Machians) has never looked into the idealist views originally held by
Mach and Avenarius, has never understood their fundamental idealist
premises, and has therefore failed to discover the illegitimacy and
eclecticism of their subsequent attempts to smuggle in materialism
surreptitiously. Yet, just as the initial idealism of Mach and Avenarius
is generally acknowledged in philosophical literature, so is it
generally acknowledged that subsequently empirio-criticism endeavoured
to swing towards materialism. Cauwelaert, the French writer quoted
above, asserts that Avenarius’ _Prolegomena_ is “monistic idealism,”
_The Critique of Pure Experience_^([9]) (1888–90) is “absolute realism,”
while _The Human Concept of the World_ (1891) is an attempt “to explain”
the change. Let us note that the term realism is here employed as the
antithesis of idealism. Following Engels, I use _only_ the term
materialism in this sense, and consider it the sole correct terminology,
especially since the term “realism” has been bedraggled by the
positivists and the other muddleheads who oscillate between materialism
and idealism. For the present it will suffice to note that Cauwelaert
had the indisputable fact in mind that in the _Prolegomena_ (1876)
sensation, according to Avenarius, is the only entity, while
“substance"—in accordance with the principle of “the economy of
thought"!—is eliminated, and that in the _Critique of Pure Experience_
the physical is taken as the _independent series,_ while the psychical
and, consequently, sensations, are taken as the dependent series.

Avenarius’ disciple Rudolf Willy likewise admits that Avenarius was a
“complete” idealist in 1876, but subsequently “reconciled” _(Ausgleich)_
“naïve realism” _(i.e.,_ the instinctive, unconscious materialist
standpoint adopted by humanity, which regards the external world as
existing independently of our minds) with this teaching (loc. cit.).

Oskar Ewald, the author of the book _Avenarius as the Founder of
Empirio-Criticism,_ says that this philosophy combines contradictory
idealist and “realist” (he should have said materialist) elements (not
in Mach’s sense, but in the human sense of the term element). For
example, “the absolute [method of consideration] would perpetuate naïve
realism, the relative would declare exclusive idealism as
permanent."^([10]) Avenarius calls the absolute method of consideration
that which corresponds to Mach’s connection of “elements” outside our
body, and the relative that which corresponds to Mach’s connection of
“elements” dependent on our body.

But of particular interest to us in this respect is the opinion of
Wundt, who himself, like the majority of the above mentioned writers,
adheres to the confused idealist standpoint, but who has analysed
empirio-criticism perhaps more attentively than all the others. p.
Yushkevich has the following to say in this connection: “It is
interesting to note that Wundt regards empirio-criticism as the most
scientific form of the latest type of materialism,”^([11]) i.e., the
type of those materialists who regard the spiritual as a function of
corporeal processes (and whom—we would add—Wundt defines as standing
midway between Spinozism^([19]) and absolute materialism^([12])).

True, this opinion of Wundt’s is extremely interesting. But what is even
more “interesting” is Mr. Yushkevich’s attitude towards the books and
articles on philosophy of which he treats. This is a typical example of
the attitude of our Machians to such matters. Gogol’s Petrushka^([20])
used to read and find it interesting that letters always combined to
make words. Mr. Yushkevich read Wundt and found it “interesting” that
Wundt accused Avenarius of materialism. If Wundt is wrong, why not
refute him? If he is right, why not explain the antithesis between
materialism and empirio-criticism? Mr. Yushkevich finds what the
idealist Wundt says “interesting,” but this Machian regards it as a
waste of effort to endeavour to go to the root of the matter (probably
on the principle of “the economy of thought”). . .

The point is that by informing the reader that Wundt accuses Avenarius
of materialism, and by not informing him that Wundt regards some aspects
of empirio-criticism as materialism and others as idealism and holds
that the connection between the two is artificial, Yushkevich _entirely
distorted the matter_. Either this gentleman absolutely does not
understand what he reads, or he was prompted by a desire to indulge in
false self-praise with the help of Wundt, as if to say: you see, the
official professors regard us, too, as materialists, and not as
muddleheads.

The above-mentioned article by Wundt constitutes a large book (more than
300 pages), devoted to a detailed analysis first of the immanentist
school, and then of the empirio-criticists. Why did Wundt connect these
two schools? Because he considers them _closely akin_ ; and this
opinion, which is shared by Mach, Avenarius, Petzoldt and the
immanentists is, as we shall see later, entirely correct. Wundt shows in
the first part of this article that the immanentists are idealists,
subjectivists and adherents of fideism. This, too, as we shall see
later, is a perfectly correct opinion, although Wundt expounds it with a
superfluous ballast of professorial erudition, with superfluous niceties
and reservations, which is to be explained by the fact that Wundt
himself is an idealist and fideist. He reproaches the immanentists not
because they are idealists and adherents of fideism, but because, in his
opinion, they arrive at these great principles by incorrect methods.
Further, the second and third parts of Wundt’s article are devoted to
empirio-criticism. There he quite definitely points out that very
important theoretical propositions of empirio-criticism _(e_._g_., the
interpretation of “experience” and the “principal co-ordination,” of
which we shall speak later) are _identical_ with those held by the
immanentists _(die empiriokritische in Uebereinstimmung mit der
immanenten Philosophie annimmt,_ S. 382). Other of Avenarius’
theoretical propositions are borrowed from materialism, and in general
empirio-criticism is a “motley” _(bunte Mischung,_ _ibid_., S. 57), in
which the “various component elements are entirely heterogeneous” _(an
sich einander völlig heterogen sind,_ S. 56).

Wundt regards Avenarius’ doctrine of the “independent vital series,” in
particular, as one of the materialist morsels of the Avenarius-Mach
hotchpotch. If you start from the “system C” (that is how Avenarius—who
was very fond of making erudite play of new terms—designates the human
brain or the nervous system in general), and if the mental is for you a
function of the brain, then this “system C” is a “metaphysical
substance"—says Wundt _(ibid_., p. 64), and your doctrine is
materialism. It should be said that many idealists and all agnostics
(Kantians and Humeans included) call the materialists metaphysicians,
because it seems to them that to recognise the existence of an external
world independent of the human mind is to transcend the bounds of
experience. Of this terminology and its utter incorrectness from the
point of view of Marxism, we shall speak in its proper place. Here it is
important to note that the recognition of the “independent” series by
Avenarius (and also by Mach, who expresses the same idea in different
words) is, according to the general opinion of philosophers of various
parties, _i.e., of various trends in philosophy,_ an _appropriation from
materialism_. If you assume that everything that exists is sensation, or
that bodies are complexes of sensations, you cannot, without violating
all your fundamental premises, all “your” philosophy, arrive at the
conclusion that the _physical_ exists _independently_ of our minds, and
that sensation is a _function_ of matter organised in a definite way.
Mach and Avenarius, in their philosophy, combine fundamental idealist
premises with individual materialist deductions for the very reason that
their theory is an example of that “pauper’s broth of
eclecticism”^([21]) of which Engels speaks with just contempt.^([13])

This eclecticism is particularly marked in Mach’s latest philosophical
work, _Knowledge and Error,_ 2nd edition, 1906. We have already seen
that Mach there declared that “there is no difficulty in constructing
every physical element out of sensation, _i.e., out of psychical
elements,_” and in the same book we read: “Dependencies outside the
boundary U [ = Umgrenzung, _i.e., “the spatial boundary of our body,”_
S. 8] are physics in the broadest sense” (S. 323, § 4). “To obtain those
dependencies in a pure state _(rein erhalten)_ it is necessary as much
as possible to eliminate the influence of the observer, that is, of
those elements that lie within U” (loc. cit.). Well, well, the titmouse
first promised to set the sea on fire. . . i.e., to construct physical
elements from psychical elements, and then it turns out that physical
elements lie beyond the boundary of psychical elements, “which lie
within our body”! A remarkable philosophy!

Another example:

  “A perfect _(vollkommenes)_ gas, a perfect liquid, a perfect elastic
  body, does not exist; the physicist knows that his fictions only
  approximate to the facts and arbitrarily simplify them; he is aware of
  the divergence, which cannot be eliminated” (S. 418, § 30).

What divergence _(Abweichung)_ is meant here? The divergence of what
from what? Of thought (physical theory) from the facts. And what are
thoughts, ideas? Ideas are the “tracks of sensations” (S. 9). And what
are facts? Facts are “complexes of sensations.” And so, the divergence
of the tracks of sensations from complexes of sensations cannot be
eliminated.

What does this mean? It means that Mach forgets his own theory and, when
treating of various problems of physics, speaks plainly, without
idealist twists, _i.e., materialistically._ All the “complexes of
sensations” and the entire stock of Berkeleian wisdom vanish. The
physicists’ theory proves to be a reflection of bodies, liquids, gases
existing outside us and independently of us, a reflection which is, of
course, approximate; but to call this approximation or simplification
“arbitrary” is wrong. _In fact,_ sensation is here regarded by Mach just
as it is regarded by all science which has not been “purified” by the
disciples of Berkeley and Hume, _viz_., as an _image of the external
world_. Mach’s own theory is subjective idealism; but when the factor of
objectivity is required, Mach unceremoniously inserts into his arguments
the premises of the contrary, i.e., the materialist, theory of
knowledge. Eduard von Hartmann, a consistent idealist and consistent
reactionary in philosophy, _who sympathises with the Machians’ fight
against materialism,_ comes very close to the truth when he says that
Mach’s philosophical position is a “mixture _(Nichtunterscheidung)_ of
naïve realism and absolute illusionism”.^([14]) That is true. The
doctrine that bodies are complexes of sensations, etc., is absolute
illusionism, i.e., solipsism; for from this standpoint the world is
nothing but my illusion. On the other hand, Mach’s afore-mentioned
argument, as well as many other of his fragmentary arguments, is what is
known as “naïve realism,” i.e., the materialist theory of knowledge
unconsciously and instinctively taken over from the scientists.

Avenarius and the professors who follow in his footsteps attempt to
disguise this mixture by the theory of the “principal co-ordination.” We
shall proceed to examine this theory presently, but let us first finish
with the charge that Avenarius is a materialist. Mr. Yushkevich, to whom
Wundt’s opinion which he failed to understand seemed so interesting, was
either himself not enough interested to learn, or else did not
condescend to inform the reader, how Avenarius’ nearest disciples and
successors reacted to this charge. Yet this is necessary to clarify the
matter if we are interested in the relation of Marx’s philosophy, _i.e.,
materialism,_ to the philosophy of empirio-criticism. Moreover, if
Machism is a muddle, a mixture of materialism and idealism, it is
important to know whither this current turned—if we may so express
it—after the official idealists began to disown it because of its
concessions to materialism.

Wundt was answered, among others, by two of Avenarius’ purest and most
orthodox disciples, J. Petzoldt and Fr. Carstanjen. Petzoldt, with
haughty resentment, repudiated the charge of materialism, which is so
degrading to a German professor, and in support referred to—what do you
think?—Avenarius’ _Prolegomena,_ where, supposedly, the concept of
substance has been annihilated! A convenient theory, indeed, that can be
made to embrace both purely idealist works and arbitrarily assumed
materialist premises! Avenarius’ _Critique of Pure Experience,_ of
course, does not contradict this teaching, _i.e., materialism,_ writes
Petzoldt, but neither does it contradict the directly opposite
spiritualist doctrine.^([15]) An excellent defence! This is exactly what
Engels called “a pauper’s broth of eclecticism.” Bogdanov, who refuses
to own himself a Machian and who wants to be considered a Marxist _(in
philosophy),_ follows Petzoldt. He asserts that “empirio-criticism is
not . . . concerned with materialism, or with spiritualism, or with
metaphysics in general,”^([16]) that “truth . . . does not lie in the
‘golden mean’ between the conflicting trends [materialism and
spiritualism], but lies out side of both".^([17]) What appeared to
Bogdanov to be truth is, as a matter of fact, confusion, a wavering
between materialism and idealism.

Carstanjen, rebutting Wundt, said that he absolutely repudiated this
“importation _(Unterschiebung)_ of a materialist element” which is
utterly foreign to the critique of pure experience.”.^([18])
“Empirio-criticism is scepticism χαι εςοχην (pre-eminently) in relation
to the content of the concepts.” There is a grain of truth in this
insistent emphasis on the neutrality of Machism; the amendment made by
Mach and Avenarius to their original idealism amounts to partial
concessions to materialism. Instead of the consistent standpoint of
Berkeley—the external world is my sensation—we some times get the Humean
standpoint—I exclude the question whether or not there is anything
beyond my sensations. And this agnostic standpoint inevitably condemns
one to vacillate between materialism and idealism.

Notes

[1] Friedrich W. Adler, “_Die Entdeckung der Weltelemente (zu E. Machs
70. Geburtstag)_” _[The Discovery of the World-Elements (On the Occasion
of E. Mach’s 70th Birthday)_], _Der Kampf_,^([22]) 1908, Nr. 5
(Februar). Translated in _The International Socialist Review_,^([23])
1908, No. 10 (April). One of Adler’s articles has been translated into
Russian in the symposium _Historical Materialism_. —_Lenin_

[2] Mach says in the _Analysis of Sensations_: “These elements are
usually called sensations. But as that term already implies a one-sided
theory, we prefer to speak simply of elements” (pp. 27-28). —_Lenin_

[3] “The antithesis between the self and the world, sensation or
appearance and the thing, then vanishes, and it all reduces itself to a
complex or elements” _(ibid_., p. 21). —_Lenin_

[4] Joseph Petzoldt, _Einführung in die Philosophie der reinen
Erfahrung_ [_Introduction to the Philosophy of Pure Experience],_ Bd. I,
Leipzig, 1900, S. 113: “Elements are sensations in the ordinary sense of
simple, irreducible perceptions _(Wahrnehmungen)_.” —_Lenin_

[5] V. Lesevich, _What Is Scientific_ [read: fashionable, professorial,
eclectic] _Philosophy?,_ St. Petersburg, 1891, pp. 229, 247. Petzoldt,
Bd. II, Leipzig, 1904, S. 329. —_Lenin_

[6] Petzoldt, Bd. II, Leipzig, 1904, S. 329. —_Lenin_

[7] R. Avenarius, “_Bemerkungen zum Begriff des Gegenstandes der
Psychologie,_” _Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche
Philosophie_,^([24]) Bd. XVIII (1894) und Bd. XIX (1895). —_Lenin_

[8] _The Fundamental Elements,_ etc., p. 216; cf. the quotations cited
above. —_Lenin_

[9] _Kritik der reinen Erfahrung_.—_Ed_.

[10] Oskar Ewald, _Richard Avenarius als Begründer des
Empiriokritizismus [Richard Avenarius as the Founder of
Empirio-Criticism],_ Berlin, , S. 66. —_Lenin_

[11] p. Yushkevich, _Materialism and Critical Realism,_ St. Petersburg,
1908, p. 15. —_Lenin_

[12] W. Wundt, “_Ueber naiven und kritischen Realismus_” _[On Naïve and
Critical Realism],_ in _Philosophische Studien_,^([25]) Bd. XIII, 1897,
S. 334. —_Lenin_

[13] The foreword to _Ludwig Feuerbach,_ dated February 1888. These
words of Engels’ refer to German professorial philosophy in general. The
Machians who would like to be Marxists, being unable to grasp the
significance and meaning of this thought of Engels’, sometimes take
refuge in a wretched evasion: “Engels did not yet know Mach” (Fritz
Adler in _Historical_. _Mat_., p. 370). On what is this opinion based?
On the fact that Engels does not cite Mach and Avenarius? There are no
other grounds, and these grounds are worthless, for Engels does not
mention any of the eclectics by name, and it is hardly likely that
Engels did not know Avenarius, who had been editing a quarterly of
“scientific” philosophy ever since 1876. —_Lenin_

[14] Eduard von Hartmann, _Die Weltanschauung der modernen Physik_ [_The
World Outlook of Modern Physics],_ Leipzig, 1902, S. 219. —_Lenin_

[15] J. Petzoldt, _Einführung in die Philosophie der reinen Erfahrung,_
Bd. I, S. 351, 352. —_Lenin_

[16] _Empirio-Monism,_ Bk. I, 2nd ed., p. 21. —_Lenin_

[17] _Ibid_., p. 93. —_Lenin_

[18] Fr. Carstanjen, “_Der Empiriokritizismus, zugleich eine Erwiderung
auf W. Wundts Aufsätze_” _[Empirio-Criticism,_ _with a Reply to W.
Wundt’s Articles],_ Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche
Philosophie, Jahrg. 22 (1898), S. 73 und 213. —_Lenin_

[22] Der Kampf (The Struggle—)a monthly magazine, the organ of Austrian
Social-Democracy, published in Vienna from 1907 to 1934. it took up an
opportunist, Centrist position under the cover of Left phraseology.
Among its editors were Otto Bauer, Adolf Braun, Karl Renner, Friedrich
Adler and others.

[23] _The International Socialist Review_—an American Socialist monthly
magazine of a tendency inside the Socialist Party of America, published
in Chicago from 1900 to 1918.

[24] Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie (Quarterly of
Scientific Philosophy)—a magazine of the empirio-criticists (Machists),
published in Leipzig from 1877 o 1916 (from 1902 its title was
Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie und Soziologie)
(Quarterly of Scientific Philosophy and Sociology). It was founded by
Richard Avenarius and published under his editorship until 1896;after
1896 it was edited by Ernst Mach. Contributors included Wilhelm Wundt,
Alois Riehl, Wilhelm Schuppe and others.

Lenin’s appraisal of the magazine is given on p.317 of this volume.

[19] _Spinozism_—the system of views of the Dutch seventeenth-century
materialist philosopher Benedict Spinoza, according to whom all things
are manifestations (modes) of a single, universal substance, which is
its own cause and identical with “god, or nature”. The essence of
substance is expressed in innumerable qualities—attributes, the most
important of which are extension and thought. Spinoza regarded causality
as a form of the interconnection of the separate phenomena of nature,
understanding by it the immediate reciprocal action of bodies whose
first cause is substance. The action of all modes of substance,
including man, is strictly one of necessity; the notion of accident
arises only in consequence of ignorance of the totality of all the
acting causes. Since hought is one of the attributes of universal
substance, the connection and order of ideas are in principle the same
as the order and connection of things, and the possibility of human
knowledge of the world is unlimited. For the same reason, of the hree
forms of cognition—sensuous, rational and rational-intuitive—-the last
is regarded as the most rustworthy, in which “a thing is perceived
singly through its essence or through knowledge of its immediate cause”
(B. Spinoza, ractatus de intellectus emendatione, et de via, qua optime
veram, rerum cognitionem dirigitur). This method enables man both to
know his own passions and to become master over them; man’s freedom
consists in knowing the necessity of nature and of he passions of his
soul.

Spinozism was not only a form of materialism, but also of atheism, since
it rejected ideas of god as a supernatural being who had created the
world and rules it. At the same time, by identifying god and nature he
made a concession to heology. This retreat, as also the mechanical
character of Spinoza’s materialism, was due, on the one hand, to the
level of knowledge at that epoch and, on the other hand, to the limited
progressive nature of the young Dutch bourgeoisie, whose interests were
expressed by Spinoza’s philosophy. Subsequently, a sharp ideological
struggle, which has continued to the present day, developed round the
philosophical legacy of the great Dutch thinker, Idealist philosophy, by
taking advantage of the inevitable historical limitations of Spinoza’s
views, distorts the materialist essence of Spinozism, which was an
important stage in the development of he materialist world out look.

[25] _Philosophische Studien_ (_Philosophical Studies_)—a magazine of an
idealist tendency devoted primarily to questions of psychology,
published by Wilhelm Wundt in Leipzig from 1881 to 1904. From 1905 it
was published under the title Psychologische Studien (Psychological
Studies).

[20] _Petrushka_—a serf domestic servant, one of the characters in N. V.
Gogol’s novel _Dead Souls_; he used to read books by syllables without
paying any attention to the meaning, being interested only in the
mechanical process of reading.

[21] See F. Engels, _Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German
Philosophy_ (K. Marx and F, Engels, Selected Works, Volume II, Moscow,
1958, pp. 358-59).



MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM: CHAPTER 1.3, THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE OF EMPIRIO-CRITICISM AND OF DIALECTICAL MATERIALISM


The Theory of Knowledge of Empirio-Criticism and of Dialectical Materialism

Avenarius’ doctrine of the principal co-ordination is expounded in _The
Human Concept of the World_ and in the _Notes_. The second was written
later, and in it Avenarius emphasises that he is expounding, it is true
in a somewhat altered form, something that is not different from the
_Critique of Pure Experience_ and _The Human Concept of the World,_ but
_exactly the same (Notes,_ 1894, S. 137 in the journal quoted above).
The essence of this doctrine is the thesis of “the _indissoluble
(unauflösliche)_ co-ordination [i.e., the correlative connection] _of
the self and the environment_” (p. 146). “Expressed philosophically,”
Avenarius says here, one can say the “_self_ and _not-self_.” We
“_always_ find together” _(immer ein Zusammen-vorgefundenes)_ the one
and the other, the _self_ and the environment. “No full description of
what we find _(des Vorgefundenem)_ can contain an ‘environment’ without
some _self (ohne ein Ich)_ _whose_ environment it is, even though it be
only the _self_ that is describing what is found _(das Vorgefundene)_”
(p. 146). The _self_ is called the _central term_ of the co-ordination,
the environment the _counter-term (Gegenglied)_. (Cf. _Der menschliche
Weltbegriff,_ 2. Auflage, 1905, S. 83-84, § 148 ff.)

Avenarius claims that by this doctrine he recognises the full value of
what is known as naïve realism, that is, the ordinary,
non-philosophical, naïve view which is entertained by all people who do
not trouble themselves as to whether they themselves exist and whether
the environment, the external world, exists. Expressing his solidarity
with Avenarius, Mach also tries to represent himself as a defender of
“naïve realism” _(Analysis of Sensations,_ p. 39). The Russian Machians,
without exception, believed Mach’s and Avenarius’ claim that this was
indeed a defence of “naïve realism": the _self_ is acknowledged, the
environment is acknowledged—what more do you want?

In order to decide who actually possesses the greatest degree of
_naïveté,_ let us proceed from a somewhat remote starting point. Here is
a popular dialogue between a certain philosopher and his reader:

  READER: The existence of a system of things [according to ordinary
  philosophy] is required and from them only is consciousness to be
  derived.

  AUTHOR: Now you are speaking in the spirit of a professional
  philosopher . . . and not according to human common sense and actual
  consciousness. . . .

  Tell me, and reflect well before you answer: Does a thing appear in
  you and become present in you and for you otherwise than
  simultaneously with and through your consciousness of the thing? . . .

  READER: Upon sufficient reflection, I must grant you this.

  AUTHOR: Now you are speaking from yourself, from your heart. Take
  care, therefore, not to jump out of yourself and to apprehend anything
  otherwise than you are able to apprehend it, as consciousness _and_
  [the italics are the philosopher’s] the thing, the thing _and_
  consciousness; or, more precisely, neither the one nor the other, but
  that which only subsequently becomes resolved into the two, that which
  is the absolute subjective-objective and objective-subjective.

Here you have the whole essence of the empirio-critical principal
co-ordination, the latest defence of “naïve realism” by the latest
positivism! The idea of “indissoluble” co-ordination is here stated very
clearly and as though it were a genuine defence of the point of view of
the common man, undistorted by the subtleties of “the professional
philosophers.” But, as a matter of fact, this dialogue is taken from the
work of a classical representative of subjective idealism, Johann
Gottlieb _Fichte_, _published in 1801_.^([1])

There is nothing but a paraphrase of subjective idealism in the
teachings of Mach and Avenarius we are examining. The claim that they
have risen above materialism and idealism, that they have eliminated the
opposition between the point of view that proceeds from the thing _to_
consciousness and the contrary point of view—is but the empty claim of a
renovated Fichteanism. Fichte too imagined that he had “indissolubly”
connected the “self” and the “environment,” the consciousness and the
thing; that he had “solved” the problem by the assertion that a man
cannot jump out of himself. In other words, the Berkeleian argument is
repeated: I perceive only my sensations, I have no right to assume
“objects in themselves” outside of my sensation. The different methods
of expression used by Berkeley in 1710, by Fichte in 1801, and by
Avenarius in 1891-94 do not in the least change the essence of the
matter, _viz_., the fundamental philosophical line of subjective
idealism. The world is my sensation; the non-_self_ is “postulated” (is
created, produced) by the _self_; the thing is indissolubly connected
with the consciousness; the indissoluble co-ordination of the _self_ and
the environment is the empirio-critical principal co-ordination;—this is
all one and the same proposition, the same old trash with a slightly
refurbished, or repainted, signboard.

The reference to “naïve realism,” supposedly defended by this
philosophy, is _sophistry_ of the cheapest kind. The “naïve realism” of
any healthy person who has not been an inmate of a lunatic asylum or a
pupil of the idealist philosophers consists in the view that things, the
environment, the world, exist _independently_ of our sensation, of our
consciousness, of our _self_ and of man in general. The same
_experience_ (not in the Machian sense, but in the human sense of the
term) that has produced in us the firm conviction that _independently_
of us there exist other people, and not mere complexes of my sensations
of high, short, yellow, hard, etc.—this same _experience_ produces in us
the conviction that things, the world, the environment exist
independently of us. Our sensation, our consciousness is only _an image_
of the external world, and it is obvious that an image cannot exist
without the thing imaged, and that the latter exists independently of
that which images it. Materialism _deliberately_ makes the “naïve”
belief of mankind the foundation of its theory of knowledge.

Is not the foregoing evaluation of the “principal co-ordination” a
product of the materialist prejudice against Machism? Not at all.
Specialists in philosophy who cannot be accused of partiality towards
materialism, who even detest it and who accept one or other of the
idealist systems, agree that the principal co-ordination of Avenarius
and Co. is subjective idealism. Wundt, for instance, whose interesting
opinion was not understood by Mr. Yushkevich, explicitly states that
Avenarius’ theory, according to which a full description of the given or
the found is impossible without some _self,_ an observer or describer,
is “a false confusion of the content of real experience with reflections
about it.” Natural science, says Wundt, completely abstracts from every
observer.

  “Such abstraction is possible only because the attribution
  _(Hinzudenken)_ of an experiencing individual to every content of
  experience, which the empirio-critical philosophy, in agreement with
  the immanentist philosophy, assumes, is in general an empirically
  unfounded assumption arising from a false confusion of the content of
  real experience with reflections about it” (loc. cit., p. 382).

For the immanentists (Schuppe, Rehmke, Leclair, Schubert-Soldern), who
themselves voice—as we shall see later—their hearty sympathy with
Avenarius, proceed from this very idea of the “indissoluble” connection
between subject and object. And W. Wundt, before analysing Avenarius,
demonstrated in detail that the immanentist philosophy is only a
“modification” of Berkeleianism that however much the immanentists may
deny their kinship with Berkeley we should not allow verbal differences
to conceal from us the “deeper content of these philosophical
doctrines,” _viz_., Berkeleianism or Fichteanism.^([2])

The English writer Norman Smith, analysing Avenarius’ _Philosophy of
Pure Experience,_ puts this criticism in an even more straightforward
and emphatic form:

  "Most readers of Avenarius’ _The Human Concept of the World_ will
  probably agree that, however convincing as criticism [of idealism], it
  is tantalisingly illusive in its positive teaching. So long as we seek
  to interpret his theory of experience in the form in which it is
  avowedly presented, namely, as genuinely realistic, it eludes all
  clear comprehension: its whole meaning seems to be exhausted in
  negation of the subjectivism which it overthrows. It is only when we
  translate Avenarius’ technical terms into more familiar language that
  we discover where the real source of the mystification lies. Avenarius
  has diverted attention from the defects of his position by directing
  his main attack against the very weakness [i.e., of the idealist
  position] which is fatal to his own theory.”^([3])

  “Throughout the whole discussion the vagueness of the term experience
  stands him in good stead. Sometimes it means experiencing and at other
  times the experienced, the latter meaning being emphasised when the
  nature of the _self_ is in question. These two meanings of the term
  experience practically coincide with his important distinction between
  the absolute and the relative standpoints [I have examined above what
  significance this distinction has for Avenarius]; and these two points
  of view are not in his philosophy really reconciled. For when he
  allows as legitimate the demand that experience be ideally completed
  in thought [the full description of the environment is ideally
  completed by thinking of an observing _self],_ he makes an admission
  which he cannot successfully combine with his assertion that nothing
  exists save in relation to the _self_. The ideal completion of given
  reality which results from the analysis of material bodies into
  elements which no human senses can apprehend [here are meant the
  material elements discovered by natural science, the atoms, electrons,
  etc., and not the fictitious elements invented by Mach and Avenarius],
  or from following the earth back to a time when no human being existed
  upon it, is, strictly, not a completion of experience but only of what
  is experienced. It completes only one of the two aspects which
  Avenarius has asserted to be inseparable. It leads us not only to what
  has not been experienced but to what can never by any possibility be
  experienced by beings like ourselves. But here again the ambiguities
  of the term experience come to Avenarius’ rescue. He argues that
  thought is as genuine a form of experience as sense-perception, and so
  in the end falls back on the time-worn argument of subjective
  idealism, that thought and reality are inseparable, because reality
  can only be conceived in thought, and thought involves the presence of
  the thinker. Not, therefore, any original and profound
  re-establishment of realism, but only the restatement in its crudest
  form of the familiar position of subjective idealism is the final
  outcome of Avenarius’ positive speculations” (p. 29).

The mystification wrought by Avenarius, who completely duplicates
Fichte’s error, is here excellently exposed. The much-vaunted
elimination of the antithesis between materialism (Norman Smith should
not have used the term realism) and idealism by means of the term
“experience” instantly proves to be a myth as soon as we proceed to
definite and concrete problems. Such, for instance, is the problem of
the existence of the earth _prior_ to man, _prior_ to any sentient
being. We shall presently speak of this point in detail. Here we will
note that not only Norman Smith, an opponent of his theory, but also W.
Schuppe, the immanentist, who warmly greeted the appearance of _The
Human Concept of the World_ as _a confirmation of naïve realism_^([4])
unmasks Avenarius and his fictitious “realism.” The fact of the matter
is that Schuppe _fully_ agrees with _such_ “realism,” i.e., the
mystification of materialism dished out by Avenarius. Such “realism,” he
wrote to Avenarius, I, the immanentist philosopher, who have been
slandered as a subjective idealist, have always claimed with as much
right as yourself, _hochverehrter Herr Kollege_. "My conception of
thought . . . excellently harmonises _(verträgt sich vortrefflich)_ with
your ‘Theory of pure experience’” (p. 384). “The connection and
inseparability of the two terms of the co-ordination” are in fact
provided only by the _self (das Ich,_ the abstract, Fichtean
self-consciousness, thought divorced from the brain). “That which you
desired to eliminate you have tacitly assumed"—so Schuppe wrote to
Avenarius (p. 388). And it is difficult to say who more rudely unmasks
Avenarius the mystifier—Smith by his straightforward and clear
refutation, or Schuppe by his enthusiastic opinion of Avenarius’
crowning work. The kiss of Wilhelm Schuppe in philosophy is no better
than the kiss of Peter Struve or Menshikov^([6]) in politics.

O. Ewald, who praises Mach for not succumbing to materialism, speaks of
the principal co-ordination in a similar manner:

  “If one declares the correlation of central term and counter-term to
  be an epistemological necessity which cannot be avoided, then, even
  though the word ‘empirio-criticism’ be inscribed on the signboard in
  shrieking letters, one is adopting a standpoint that differs in no way
  from absolute idealism. [The term is incorrect; he should have said
  subjective idealism, for Hegel’s absolute idealism is reconcilable
  with the existence of the earth, nature, and the physical universe
  without man, since nature is regarded as the “otherness” of the
  absolute idea.] On the other hand, if we do not hold fast to this
  co-ordination and grant the counter-terms their independence, then the
  way is at once opened for every metaphysical possibility, especially
  in the direction of transcendental realism” (op. cit., pp. 56-57).

By metaphysics and transcendental realism, Herr Friedländer, who is
disguised under the pseudonym Ewald, means _materialism_. Himself
professing one of the varieties of idealism, he fully agrees with the
Machians and the Kantians that materialism is metaphysics—"from
beginning to end the wildest metaphysics” (p. 134). On the question of
the “transcendence” and the metaphysical character of materialism he is
in agreement with Bazarov and all our Machians, and of this we shall
have occasion to say more later. Here again it is important to note how
_in fact_ the shallow and pedantic claim to have transcended idealism
and materialism vanishes, and how the question arises inexorably and
irreconcilably. “To grant the counter-terms their independence” means
(if one translates the pretentious language of the affected Avenarius
into common parlance) to regard nature and the external world as
independent of human consciousness and sensation. And that is
materialism. To build a theory of knowledge on the hypothesis of the
indissoluble connection between the object and human sensation
("complexes of sensations” as identical with bodies; “world-elements”
that are identical both psychically and physically; Avenarius’
co-ordination, and so forth) is to land inevitably into idealism. Such
is the simple and unavoidable truth that with a little attention may be
easily detected beneath the piles of affected quasi-erudite terminology
of Avenarius, Schuppe, Ewald and the others, which deliberately obscures
matters and frightens the general public away from philosophy.

The “reconciliation” of Avenarius’ theory with “naïve realism” in the
end aroused misgivings even among his own disciples. For instance, R.
Willy says that the common assertion that Avenarius came to adopt “naïve
realism” should be taken _cum grano salis_.— “As a dogma, naïve realism
would be nothing but the belief in things-in-themselves existing outside
man _(ausserpersönliche)_ in their perceptible form."^([5]) In other
words, the only theory of knowledge that is really created by an actual
and not fictitious agreement with “naïve realism” is, according to
Willy, materialism! And Willy, of course, rejects materialism. But he is
compelled to admit that Avenarius in _The Human Concept of the World_
restores the unity of “experience,” the unity of the “self” and the
environment “by means of a series of complicated and extremely
artificial subsidiary and intermediary conceptions” (p. 171). _The Human
Concept of the World,_ being a reaction against the original idealism of
Avenarius, “entirely bears the character of a _reconciliation (eines
Ausgleiches)_ between the naïve realism of common sense and the
epistemological idealism of school philosophy. But that such a
reconciliation could restore the unity and integrity of experience
[Willy calls it _Grunderfahrung,_ that is, basic experience—another new
world!], I would not assert” (p. 170).

A valuable admission! Avenarius’ “experience” failed to reconcile
idealism and materialism. Willy, it seems, repudiates the _school
philosophy_ of experience in order to replace it by a philosophy of
“basic” experience, which is confusion thrice confounded....

Notes

[1] Johann Gottlieb Fichte, _Sonnenklarer Bericht an das grössere
Publikum über das eigentliche Wesen der neuesten Philosophie_. _Ein
Versuch, die Leser zum Verstehen zu zwingen_ [_A Clear Account to the
Broad Public of the True Nature of Recent Philosophy_. _An Attempt to
Get the Reader to Understand_], Berlin, 1801, S. 178-80. —_Lenin_

[2] _Loc_. _cit_., § C: “The Immanentist Philosophy and Berkeleian
Idealism,” pp. 373 and 375; cf. pp. 386 and 407. “The Unavoidability of
Solipsism from This Standpoint,” p. 381. —_Lenin_

[3] Norman Smith, “Avenarius’ Philosophy of Pure Experience,”
_Mind_,^([7]) Vol. XV, 1906, pp. 27-28. —_Lenin_

[4] See W. Schuppe’s open letter to R. Avenarius in _Vierteljahrsschrift
für wissenschaftliche Philosophie,_ Bd. XVII, 1893, S. 364-88. —_Lenin_

[5] R. Willy, _Gegen die Schulweisheit,_ S. 170. —_Lenin_

[7] _Mind_—a magazine of an idealist tendency, devoted to questions of
philosophy and sociology. It was published from 1876 in London, and is
now issued in Edinburgh; the first editor was Professor Croom Robertson.

[6] Struve, P. B—a former “legal Marxist”, one of the founders of the
Cadet Party (see Note 67), a monarchist and counter-revolutionary.

Menshikov M. 0.—a contributor to the reactionary newspaper Novoye
Vremya. Lenin called him “a true watchdog of the tsarist Black
Hundreds”.



MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM: CHAPTER 1.4, DID NATURE EXIST PRIOR TO MAN?


Did Nature Exist Prior to Man?

We have already seen that this question is particularly repugnant to the
philosophy of Mach and Avenarius. Natural science positively asserts
that the earth once existed in such a state that no man or any other
creature existed or could have existed on it. Organic matter is a later
phenomenon, the fruit of a long evolution. It follows that there was no
sentient matter, no “complexes of sensations,” no _self_ that was
supposedly “indissolubly” connected with the environment in accordance
with Avenarius’ doctrine. Matter is primary, and thought, consciousness,
sensation are products of a very high development. Such is the
materialist theory of knowledge, to which natural science instinctively
subscribes.

The question arises, have the eminent representatives of
empirio-criticism observed this contradiction between their theory and
natural science? They have observed it, and they have definitely asked
themselves by what arguments this contradiction can be removed. Three
attitudes to this question are of particular interest from the point of
view of materialism, that of Avenarius himself and those of his
disciples J. Petzoldt and R. Willy.

Avenarius tries to eliminate the contradiction to natural science by
means of the theory of the “potential” central term in the
co-ordination. As we know, co-ordination is the “indissoluble”
connection between self and environment. In order to eliminate the
obvious absurdity of this theory the concept of the “potential” central
term is introduced. For instance, what about man’s development from the
embryo? Does the environment (the “counter-term") exist if the “central
term” is represented by an embryo? The embryonic system C—Avenarius
replies—is the “potential central term in relation to the future
individual environment” . The potential central term is never equal to
zero, even when there are as yet no parents _(elterliche Bestandteile),_
but only the “integral parts of the environment” capable of becoming
parents (p. 141).

The co-ordination then is indissoluble. It is essential for the
empirio-criticist to assert this in order to save the fundamentals of
his philosophy—sensations and their complexes. Man is the central term
of this co-ordination. But when there is no man, when he has not yet
been born, the central term is nevertheless not equal to zero; it has
only become a _potential_ central term ! It is astonishing that there
are people who can take seriously a philosopher who advances such
arguments! Even Wundt, who stipulates that he is not an enemy of every
form of metaphysics _(i.e.,_ of fideism), was compelled to admit “the
mystical obscuration of the concept experience” by the word “potential,”
which destroys coordination entirely (op. cit., p. 379).

And, indeed, how can one seriously speak of a co-ordination the
indissolubility of which consists in one of its terms being potential?

Is this not mysticism, the very antechamber of fideism? If it is
possible to think of the potential central term in relation to a future
environment, why not think of it in relation to a past environment, that
is, _after man’s death_ ? You will say that Avenarius did not draw this
conclusion from his theory? Granted, but that absurd and reactionary
theory became the more cowardly but not any the better for that.
Avenarius, in 1894, did not carry this theory to its logical conclusion,
or perhaps feared to do so. But R. Schubert Soldern, as we shall see,
resorted in 1896 to _this very theory_ to arrive at theological
conclusions, which in 1906 earned the _approval_ of Mach, who said that
Schubert-Soldern was following “_very close paths_” (to Machism).
_(Analysis of Sensations,_ p. 4.) Engels was quite right in attacking
Dühring, an avowed atheist, for inconsistently _leaving loopholes_ for
fideism in his philosophy. Engels several times. and justly, brought
this accusation against the materialist Dühring, although the latter had
not drawn any theological conclusions, in the ‘seventies at least. But
we have among us people who would have us regard them as Marxists, yet
who bring to the masses a philosophy which comes very close to fideism.

Avenarius wrote in the _Bemerkungen_:

  “. . . It would seem that from the empirio-critical standpoint natural
  science is not entitled to enquire about periods of our present
  environment which in time preceded the existence of man” (S. 144).

Avenarius answers:

  “The enquirer cannot avoid mentally projecting himself _(sich
  hinzuzudenken,_ i.e., imagining one self to be present) . . . for what
  the scientist wants (although he may not be clearly aware of it) is
  essentially only this: how is the earth to be defined prior to the
  appearance of living beings or man if I were mentally to project
  myself in the role of a spectator—in much the same way as though it
  were thinkable that we could from our earth follow the history of
  another star or of another solar system with the help of perfected
  instruments.”

An object cannot exist independently of our consciousness. “We always
mentally project ourselves as the intelligence endeavouring to apprehend
the object.”

This theory of the necessity of “mentally projecting” the human mind to
every object and to nature prior to man is given by me in the first
paragraph in the words of the “recent positivist,” R. Avenarius, and in
the second, in the words of the subjective idealist, J. G. Fichte.^([1])
The sophistry of this theory is so manifest that it is embarrassing to
analyse it. If we “mentally project” ourselves, our presence will be
_imaginary_—but the existence of the earth prior to man is _real_. Man
_could not_ in practice be an observer, for instance, of the earth in an
incandescent state, and to “imagine” his being present at the time is
_obscurantism,_ exactly as though I were to endeavour to prove the
existence of hell by the argument that if I “mentally projected” myself
thither as an observer I could observe hell. The “reconciliation” of
empirio-criticism and natural science amounts to this, that Avenarius
graciously consents to “mentally project” something the possibility of
admitting which is _excluded_ by natural science. No man at all educated
or sound-minded doubts that the earth existed at a time when there
_could not_ have been any life on it, any sensation or any “central
term,” and consequently the whole theory of Mach and Avenarius, from
which it follows that the earth is a complex of sensations ("bodies are
complexes of sensations") or “complexes of elements in which the
psychical and physical are identical,” or “a counter-term of which the
central term can never be equal to zero,” is _philosophical
obscurantism,_ the carrying of subjective idealism to absurdity.

J. Petzoldt perceived the absurdity of the position into which Avenarius
had fallen and felt ashamed. In his _Introduction to the Philosophy of
Pure Experience_ (Vol. II) he devotes a whole paragraph (§ 65) “to the
question of the reality of earlier _(frühere)_ periods of the earth.”
Petzoldt says:

  "In the teaching of Avenarius the _self (das Ich)_ plays a role
  different from that which it plays with Schuppe [let us note that
  Petzoldt openly and repeatedly declares: our philosophy was founded by
  _three_ men—Avenarius, Mach and Schuppe], yet it is a role which,
  perhaps, possesses too much importance for his theory [Petzoldt was
  evidently influenced by the fact that Schuppe had unmasked Avenarius
  by showing that with him too everything rests entirely on the _self_;
  and Petzoldt wishes to make a correction] . . . Avenarius said on one
  occasion that we can think of a ‘region’ where no human foot has yet
  trodden, but to be able _to think_ (italicised by Avenarius) of such
  an environment there is required what we designate by the term _self
  (Ich-Bezeichnetes),_ _whose_ (italicised by Avenarius) thought the
  thinking is _(V. f. wiss. Ph.,_ 18. Bd., 1894, S. 146, Anm.).”

Petzoldt replies:

  "The epistemologically important question, however, is not whether we
  can think of such a region at all, but whether we are entitled to
  think of it as existing, or as having existed, independently of any
  individual mind.”

What is true, is true! People can think and “mentally project” for
themselves any kind of hell and any kind of devil. Lunacharsky even
“mentally projected” for himself—well, to use a mild
expression—religious conceptions.^([6]) But it is precisely the purpose
of the theory of knowledge to show the unreal, fantastic and reactionary
character of such projections.

  “. . . For, that the system C [i.e., the brain] is necessary for
  thought is obvious both for Avenarius and for the philosophy which is
  here presented. . . .”

That is not true. Avenarius’ theory of 1876 is a theory of thought
without brain. And in his theory of 1891-94, as we shall presently see,
there is a similar element of idealist nonsense.

  “. . . But is this system C _a condition of existence_ [italicised by
  Petzoldt] of, say, the Mesozoic period _(Sekundärzeit)_ of the earth?”

And Petzoldt, presenting the argument of Avenarius I have already cited
on the subject of what science actually wants and how we can “mentally
project” the spectator, objects:

  “No, we wish to know whether I have the right to think that the earth
  at that remote epoch existed in the same way as I think of it as
  having existed yesterday or a minute ago. Or must the existence of the
  earth be really made conditional, as _Willy_ claimed, on our right at
  least to assume that at the given period there co-existed some system
  C, even though at the lowest stage of its development?”

Of this idea of Willy’s we shall speak presently.

  “Avenarius evades Willy’s strange conclusion by the argument that the
  person who puts the question cannot mentally remove himself _(sich
  wegdenken,_ i.e., think himself as absent), nor can he avoid mentally
  projecting himself _(sich hinzuzudenken,_ see Avenarius, _The Human
  Concept of the World,_ 1st Germ. ed., p. 130). But then Avenarius
  makes the individual _self_ of the person who puts the question, or
  the thought of such a _self,_ the condition not only of the act of
  thought regarding the uninhabitable earth, but also of the
  justification for believing in the existence of the earth at that
  time.

  These false paths are easily avoided if we do not ascribe so much
  theoretical importance to the _self_. The only thing the theory of
  knowledge should demand of the various conceptions of that which is
  remote in space or time is that it be conceivable and uniquely
  _(eindeutig)_ determined, the rest is the affair of the special
  sciences” (Vol. II, p. 325).

Petzoldt rechristened the law of causality the law of unique
determination and imported into his theory, as we shall see later, the
_apriority_ of this law. This means that Petzoldt saves himself from
Avenarius’ subjective idealism and solipsism (“he attributes an
exaggerated importance to the _self,_” as the professorial jargon has
it) with the help of _Kantian_ ideas. The absence of the objective
factor in Avenarius’ doctrine, the impossibility of reconciling it with
the demands of natural science, which declares the earth (object) to
have existed long before the appearance of living beings (subject),
compelled Petzoldt to resort to causality (unique determination). The
earth existed, for its existence prior to man is causally connected with
the present existence of the earth. Firstly, where does causality come
from? _A priori,_—[34] says Petzoldt. Secondly, are not the ideas of
hell, devils, and Lunacharsky’s “mental projections” also connected by
causality? Thirdly, the theory of the “complexes of sensations” in any
case turns out to be destroyed by Petzoldt. Petzoldt failed to resolve
the contradiction he observed in Avenarius, and only entangled himself
still more, for only one solution is possible, _viz_., the recognition
that the external world reflected by our mind exists independently of
our mind. This materialist solution alone is really compatible with
natural science, and it alone eliminates both Petzoldt’s and Mach’s
idealist solution of the question of causality, which we shall speak of
separately.

The third empirio-criticist, R. Willy, first raised the question of this
difficulty in Avenarius’ philosophy in 1896, in an article entitled
“_Der Empiriokritizismus als einzig wissenschaftlicher Standpunkt_”
("Empirio-Criticism as the Only Scientific Standpoint"). What about the
world prior to man?—Willy asks here,^([2]) and at first answers
according to Avenarius: “we project ourselves _mentally_ into the past.”
But then he goes on to say that we are not necessarily obliged to regard
experience as human _experience_. “For we must simply regard the animal
kingdom—be it the most insignificant worm—as primitive fellow-men
_(Mitmenschen)_ if we regard animal life in connection with general
experience” (pp. 73-74). Thus, prior to man the earth was the
“experience” of a worm, which discharged the functions of the “central
term” in order to save Avenarius’ “co-ordination” and Avenarius’
philosophy! No wonder Petzoldt tried to dissociate himself from an
argument which is not only the height of absurdity (ideas of the earth
corresponding to the theories of the geologists attributed to a worm),
but which does not in any way help our philosopher, for the earth
existed not only before man but before any living being generally.

Willy returned to the question in 1905. The worm was now removed.^([3])
But Petzoldt’s “law of unique determination” could not, of course,
satisfy Willy, who regarded it merely as “logical formalism.” The author
says—will not the question of the world prior to man, as Petzoldt puts
it, lead us “back again to the things-in-themselves of common sense"?
(i.e., to materialism! How terrible indeed!). What does millions of
years without life mean?

  “Is time perhaps a thing-in-itself? Of course not!^([4]) And that
  means that things outside men are only impressions, bits of fantasy
  fabricated by men with the help of a few fragments we find about us.
  And why not? Need the philosopher fear the stream of life? . . . And
  so I say to myself: abandon all this love of systems and grasp the
  moment _(ergreife den Augenblick),_ the moment you are living in, the
  moment which alone brings happiness” (pp. 177-78).

Well, well! Either materialism or solipsism—this, in spite of his
vociferous phrases, is what Willy arrives at when he analyses the
question of the existence of nature before man.

To summarise. Three augurs of empirio-criticism have appeared before us
and have laboured in the sweat of their brow to reconcile their
philosophy with natural science, to patch up the holes of solipsism.
Avenarius repeated Fichte’s argument and substituted an imaginary world
for the real world. Petzoldt withdrew from Fichtean idealism and moved
towards Kantian idealism. Willy, having suffered a fiasco with the
“worm,” threw up the sponge and inadvertently blurted out the truth:
either materialism or solipsism, or even the recognition of nothing but
the present moment.

It only remains for us to show the reader _how_ this problem was
understood and treated by our own native Machians. Here is Bazarov in
the _Studies_ “_in” the Philosophy of Marxism_ (p. 11):

  “It remains for us now, under the guidance of our faithful _vademecum_
  [35] i.e., Plekhanov], to descend into the last and most horrible
  circle of the solipsist inferno, into that circle where, as Plekhanov
  assures us, every subjective idealism is menaced with the necessity of
  conceiving the world as it was contemplated by the ichthyosauruses and
  archaeopteryxes. ‘Let us mentally transport ourselves,’ writes
  Plekhanov, ‘to that epoch when only very remote ancestors of man
  existed on the earth, for instance, to the Mesozoic period. The
  question arises, what was the status of space, time and causality
  then? Whose subjective forms were they then? Were they the subjective
  forms of the ichthyosauruses? And whose intelligence at that time
  dictated its laws to nature? The intelligence of the archaeopteryx? To
  these queries the Kantian philosophy can give no answer. And it must
  be rejected as absolutely incompatible with modern science’ _(L.
  Feuerbach, p. 117).”_

Here Bazarov breaks the quotation from Plekhanov just before a very
important passage—as we shall soon see—namely:

  “Idealism says that without subject there is no object. The history of
  the earth shows that the object existed long before the subject
  appeared, i.e., long before the appearance of organisms possessing a
  perceptible degree of consciousness. . . . The history of development
  reveals the truth of materialism.”

We continue the quotation from Bazarov:

  “. . . But does Plekhanov’s thing-in-itself provide the desired
  solution? Let us remember that even according to Plekhanov we can have
  no idea of things as they are in themselves; we know only their
  manifestations, only the results of their action on our sense-organs.
  ‘Apart from this action they possess no aspect’ _(L_. _Feuerbach,_ p.
  112). What sense-organs existed in the period of the ichthyosauruses?
  Evidently, only the sense-organs of the ichthyosauruses and their
  like. Only the ideas of the ichthyosauruses were then the actual, the
  real manifestations of things-in-themselves. Hence, according to
  Plekhanov also, if the paleontologist desires to remain on ‘real’
  ground he must write the story of the Mesozoic period in the light of
  the contemplations of the ichthyosaurus. And, consequently, not a
  single step forward is made in comparison with solipsism.”

Such is the complete argument (the reader must pardon the lengthy
quotation—we could not avoid it) of a Machian, an argument worthy of
perpetuation as a first-class example of muddleheadedness.

Bazarov imagines that Plekhanov gave himself away. If
things-in-themselves, apart from their action on our sense organs, have
no aspect of their own, then in the Mesozoic period they did not exist
except as the “aspect” of the sense organs of the ichthyosaurus. And
this is the argument of a materialist! If an “aspect” is the result of
the action of “things-in-themselves” on sense-organs—does it follow that
things _do not exist independently_ of sense-organs of one kind or
another??

Let us assume for a moment that Bazarov indeed “misunderstood”
Plekhanov’s words (improbable as such an assumption may seem), that they
did appear obscure to him. Be it so. We ask: is Bazarov engaged in a
fencing bout with Plekhanov (whom the Machians exalt to the position of
the only representative of materialism!), or is he endeavouring to clear
up the problem of _materialism_ ? If Plekhanov seemed obscure to you, or
contradictory, and so forth, why did you not turn to other materialists?
Is it because you do not know them? But ignorance is no argument.

If Bazarov indeed does not know that the fundamental premise of
materialism is the recognition of the external world, of the existence
of _things_ outside and independent of our mind, this is truly a
striking case of crass ignorance. We would remind the reader of
Berkeley, who in 1710 rebuked the materialists for their recognition of
“objects in themselves” existing independently of our mind and reflected
by our mind. Of course, everybody is free to side with Berkeley or
anyone else _against_ the materialists; that is unquestionable. But it
is equally unquestionable that to speak of the materialists and distort
or ignore the fundamental premise of _all_ materialism is to import
preposterous confusion into the problem.

Was Plekhanov right when he said that for idealism there is no object
without a subject, while for materialism the object exists independently
of the subject and is reflected more or less adequately in the subject’s
mind? If this is _wrong,_ then any man who has the slightest respect for
Marxism should have pointed out _this_ error of Plekhanov’s, and should
have dealt _not_ with him, but with someone else, with Marx, Engels, or
Feuerbach, on the question of materialism and the existence of nature
prior to man. But if this is right, or, at least, if you are unable to
find an error here, then your attempt to shuffle the cards and to
confuse in the reader’s mind the most elementary conception of
materialism, as distinguished from idealism, is a literary indecency.

As for the Marxists who are interested in the question _apart_ from
every little word uttered by Plekhanov, we shall quote the opinion of L.
Feuerbach, who, as is known (perhaps not to Bazarov?), was a
materialist, and through whom Marx and Engels, as is well known, came
from the idealism of Hegel to their materialist philosophy. In his
rejoinder to R. Haym, Feuerbach wrote:

  “Nature, which is not an object of man or mind, is for speculative
  philosophy, or at least for idealism, a Kantian thing-in-itself [we
  shall speak later in detail of the fact that our Machians confuse the
  Kantian thing-in-itself with the materialist thing-in-itself], an
  abstraction without reality, but it is nature that causes the downfall
  of idealism. Natural science, at least in its present state,
  necessarily leads us back to a point when the conditions for human
  existence were still absent, when nature, i.e., the earth, was not yet
  an object of the human eye and mind, when, consequently, nature was an
  absolutely non-human entity _(absolut unmenschliches Wesen)_. Idealism
  may retort: but nature also is something thought of by you _(von dir
  gedachte)_. Certainly, but from this it does not follow that this
  nature did not at one time actually exist, just as from the fact that
  Socrates and Plato do not exist for me if I do not think of them, it
  does not follow that Socrates and Plato did not actually at one time
  exist without me.”^([5])

This is how Feuerbach regarded materialism and idealism from the
standpoint of the existence of nature prior to the appearance of man.
Avenarius’ sophistry (the “mental projection of the observer") was
refuted by Feuerbach, who did not know the “recent positivism” but who
thoroughly knew the old idealist sophistries. And Bazarov offers us
absolutely nothing new, but merely repeats this sophistry of the
idealists: “Had I been there [on earth, prior to man], I would have seen
the world so-and-so” _(Studies_ “_in” the Philosophy of Marxism,_ p.
29). In other words: if I make an assumption that is obviously absurd
and contrary to natural science (that man can be an observer in an epoch
before man existed), I shall be able to patch up the breach in my
philosophy!

This gives us an idea of the extent of Bazarov’s knowledge of the
subject and of his literary methods. Bazarov did not even hint at the
“difficulty” with which Avenarius, Petzoldt and Willy wrestled; and,
moreover, he made such a hash of the whole subject, placed before the
reader such an incredible hotchpotch, that there ultimately appears to
be no difference between materialism and solipsism! Idealism is
represented as “realism,” and to materialism is ascribed the denial of
the existence of things outside of their action on the sense-organs!
Truly, either Feuerbach did not know the elementary difference between
materialism and idealism, or else Bazarov and Co. have completely
altered the elementary truths of philosophy.

Or let us take Valentinov, a philosopher who, naturally, is delighted
with Bazarov:

1.  “Berkeley is the founder of the correlativist theory of the
    relativity of subject and object” (p. 148). This is not Berkeleian
    idealism, oh, no! This is a “profound analysis.”
2.  “In the most realistic aspect, irrespective of the forms [!] of
    their usual idealist interpretation [only interpretation!], the
    fundamental premises of the theory are formulated by Avenarius” (p.
    148). Infants, as we see, are taken in by the mystification!
3.  “Avenarius’ conception of the starting point of knowledge is that
    each individual finds himself in a definite environment, in other
    words, the individual and the environment are represented as
    connected and inseparable [!] terms of one and the same
    co-ordination” (p. 148). Delightful! This is not idealism—Bazarov
    and Valentinov have risen above materialism and idealism—this
    “inseparability” of the subject and object is “realism” itself.
4.  “Is the reverse assertion correct, namely, that there is no
    counter-term to which there is no corresponding central term—an
    individual? Naturally [!] not. . . . In the Archean period the woods
    were verdant . . . yet there was no man” (p. 143). That means that
    the inseparable _can_ be separated! Is that not “natural"?
5.  “Yet from the standpoint of the theory of knowledge, the question of
    the object in itself is absurd” (p. 148). Of course! When there were
    no sentient organisms objects were nevertheless “complexes of
    elements” _identical_ with sensations!
6.  “The immanentist school, in the person of Schubert-Soldern and
    Schuppe, clad these [!] thoughts in an unsatisfactory form and found
    itself in the _cul-de-sac_ of solipsism” (p. 149). But “these
    thoughts” themselves, of course, contain no solipsism, and
    empirio-criticism, of course, is not a paraphrase of the reactionary
    theories of the immanentists, who lie when they declare themselves
    to be in sympathy with Avenarius!

This, Messrs. Machians, is not philosophy, but an incoherent jumble of
words.

Notes

[1] J. G. Fichte, _Rezension des Aenesidemus_ [_Review of Aenesidemus],_
1794, _Sämtliche Werke,_ Bd. I, S. 19. —_Lenin_

[2] _Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie_. Band XX.
1896. —_Lenin_

[3] R. Willy, _Gegen die Schulweisheit [Against School Wisdom],_ 1905,
S. 173-78. —_Lenin_

[4] We shall discuss this point with the Machians later. —_Lenin_

[5] L. Feuerbach, _Sämtliche Werke [Collected Works],_ herausgegeben von
Bolin und Jodl, Band VII, Stuttgart, 1903, S. 510; or Karl Grün, _L.
Feuerbach in seinem Briefwechsel und Nachlass,_ _sowie in seiner
philosophischen Charakterentwicklung_ [_His Correspondence,_ _Posthumous
Works and Philosophical Development_], I. Band, Leipzig, 1874, S.
423-35. —_Lenin_

[6] It can be seen from Lenin’s letter to A. I. Ulyanova-Yelizarova,
dated December 6 (19), 1908, that the original phrase in the manuscript,
viz., “Lunacharsky even ‘mentally projected’ for himself a god”, was
toned down because of the censorship. Lenin wrote in his letter:
“\thinspace‘Mentally projected for himself a god’ should be altered to
‘mentally projected for himself’—well to use a mild
expression—‘religious conceptions’, or something of that sort”
(Collected Works, present edition, Vol. 37, p. 403).



MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM: CHAPTER 1.5, DOES MAN THINK WITH THE HELP OF THE BRAIN?


Does Man Think With The Help of the Brain?

Bazarov emphatically answers this question in the affirmative. He
writes:

  “If Plekhanov’s thesis that ‘consciousness is an internal [? Bazarov]
  state of matter’ be given a more satisfactory form, _e_._g_., that
  ‘every mental process is a function of the cerebral process,’ then
  neither Mach nor Avenarius would dispute it” _(Studies_ “_in” the
  Philosophy of Marxism,_ p. 29).

To the mouse no beast is stronger than the cat. To the Russian Machians
there is no materialist stronger than Plekhanov. Was Plekhanov really
the only one, or the first, to advance the materialist thesis that
consciousness is an internal state of matter? And if Bazarov did not
like Plekhanov’s formulation of materialism, why did he take Plekhanov
and not Engels or Feuerbach?

Because the Machians are afraid to admit the truth. They are fighting
materialism, but pretend that it is only Plekhanov they are fighting. A
cowardly and unprincipled method.

But let us turn to empirio-criticism. Avenarius “would not dispute” the
statement that thought is a function of the brain. These words of
Bazarov’s contain a direct untruth. Not only does Avenarius _dispute_
the materialist thesis, but invents a whole “theory” in order to refute
it. “The brain,” says Avenarius in _The Human Concept of the World,_ “is
not the habitation, the seat, the creator, it is not the instrument or
organ, the supporter or substratum, etc., of thought” (p. 76—approvingly
quoted by Mach in the _Analysis of Sensations,_ p. 32). “Thought is not
an inhabitant, or commander, or the other half, or side, etc., nor is it
a product or even a physiological function, or a state in general of the
brain” _(ibid_.). And Avenarius expresses himself no less emphatically
in his _Notes_: “presentations” are “not functions (physiological,
psychical, or psycho-physical) of the brain” (op. cit., § 115, p. 419).
Sensations are not “psychical functions of the brain” (§ 116).

Thus, according to Avenarius, the brain is not the organ of thought, and
thought is not a function of the brain. Take Engels, and we immediately
find directly contrary, frankly materialist formulations. “Thought and
consciousness,” says Engels in _Anti-Dühring,_ “are products of the
human brain” (5th Germ. ed., p. 22).^([4]) This idea is often repeated
in that work. In _Ludwig Feuerbach_ we have the following exposition of
the views of Feuerbach and Engels: “. . . the material _(stofflich),_
sensuously perceptible world to which we ourselves belong is the only
reality . . . our consciousness and thinking, however suprasensuous they
may seem, are the product _(Erzeugnis)_ of a material, bodily organ, the
brain. Matter is not a product of mind, but mind itself is merely the
highest product of matter. This is, of course, pure materialism” (4th
Germ. ed., p. 18). Or on p. 4, where he speaks of the reflection of the
processes of nature in “the thinking brain,”^([5]) etc., etc.

Avenarius rejects this materialist standpoint and says that “the
thinking brain” is a “_fetish of natural science_” _(The Human Concept
of the World,_ 2nd Germ. ed., p. 70). Hence, Avenarius cherishes no
illusions concerning his absolute disagreement with natural science on
this point. He admits, as do Mach and all the immanentists, that natural
science holds an instinctive and unconscious materialist point of view.
He admits and explicitly declares that _he absolutely differs from the_
“_prevailing psychology_” _(Notes,_ p. 150, etc.). This prevailing
psychology is guilty of an inadmissible “introjection"—such is the new
term contrived by our philosopher—i.e., the insertion of thought into
the brain, or of sensations into us. These “two words” (into us—_in
uns),_ Avenarius goes on to say, contain the assumption _(Annahme)_ that
empirio-criticism disputes. “This insertion _(Hinein verlegung)_ of the
visible, etc., into man is what we call _introjection_” (§ 45, p. 153).

Introjection deviates “in principle” from the “natural conception of the
world” _(natürlicher Weltbegriff)_ by substituting “in me” for “before
me” _(vor mir,_ p. 154) “by turning a component part of the (real)
environment into a component part of (ideal) thought” _(ibid_.). “Out of
the _amechanical_ [a new word in place of “mental”] which manifests
itself freely and clearly in the experienced [or, in what is found—_im
Vorgefundenen],_ introjection makes something which hides itself
_[Latitierendes,_ says Avenarius—another new word] mysteriously in the
central nervous system” _(ibid_.).

Here we have the same _mystification_ that we encountered in the famous
defence of “naïve realism” by the empirio-criticists and immanentists.
Avenarius here acts on the advice of the charlatan in Turgenev^([6]):
denounce most of all those vices which you yourself possess. Avenarius
tries to pretend that he is combating idealism: philosophical idealism,
you see, is usually deduced from introjection, the external world is
converted into sensation, into idea, and so forth, while I defend “naïve
realism,” the equal reality of everything presented, both “_self_” and
environment, without inserting the external world into the human brain.

The sophistry here is the same as that which we observed in the case of
the famous co-ordination. While distracting the attention of the reader
by attacking idealism, Avenarius is in fact defending idealism, albeit
in slightly different words: thought is not a function of the brain; the
brain is not the organ of thought; sensations are not a function of the
nervous system, oh, no! sensations are—"elements,” psychical only in one
connection, while in another connection (although the elements are
“_identical_”) they are physical. With his new and muddled terminology,
with his new and pompous epithets, supposedly expressing a new “theory,”
Avenarius merely beat about the bush and returned to his fundamental
idealist premise.

And if our Russian Machians (e. c., Bogdanov) failed to notice the
“mystification” and discerned a refutation of idealism in the “new”
defence of idealism, in the analysis of empirio-criticism given by the
professional philosophers we find a sober estimate of the true nature of
Avenarius’ ideas, which is laid bare when stripped of its pretentious
terminology.

In 1903 Bogdanov wrote ("Authoritative Thinking,” an article in the
symposium _From the Psychology of Society,_ p. 119, _et seq_.):

  “Richard Avenarius presented a most harmonious and complete
  philosophical picture of the development of the dualism of spirit and
  body. The gist of his ‘doctrine of introjection’ is the following: [we
  observe only physical bodies directly, and we infer the experiences of
  others, i.e., the mind of another person, only by hypothesis]. . . .
  The hypothesis is complicated by the fact that the experiences of the
  other person are assumed to be located in his body, are inserted
  (introjected) into his organism. This is already a superfluous
  hypothesis and even gives rise to numerous contradictions. Avenarius
  systematically draws attention to these contradictions by unfolding a
  series of successive historical facts in the development of dualism
  and of philosophical idealism. But here we need not follow Avenarius.
  . . . Introjection serves as an explanation of the dualism of mind and
  body.”

Bogdanov swallowed the bait of professorial philosophy in believing that
“introjection” was aimed against idealism. He accepted the evaluation of
introjection given by Avenarius himself _at its face value_ and failed
to notice the _barb_ directed against materialism. Introjection denies
that thought is a function of the brain, that sensations are a function
of man’s central nervous system: that is, it denies the- most elementary
truth of physiology in order to destroy materialism. “Dualism,” it
appears, is refuted _idealistically_ (notwithstanding all Avenarius’
diplomatic rage against idealism), for sensation and thought prove to be
not secondary, not a product of matter, but _primary_. Dualism is here
refuted by Avenarius only in so far as he “refutes” the existence of the
object without the subject, matter without thought, the external world
independent of our sensations; that is, it is refuted _idealistically_.
The absurd denial of the fact that the visual image of a tree is a
function of the retina, the nerves and the brain, was required by
Avenarius in order to bolster up his theory of the “indissoluble”
connection of the “complete” experience, which includes not only the
self but also the tree, i.e., the environment.

The doctrine of introjection is a muddle, it smuggles in idealistic
rubbish and is contradictory to natural science, which inflexibly holds
that thought is a function of the brain, that sensations, i.e., the
images of the _external world,_ exist _within us,_ produced by the
action of things on our sense-organs. The materialist elimination of the
“dualism of mind and body” _(i.e.,_ materialist monism) consists in the
assertion that the mind does not exist independently of the body, that
mind is secondary, a function of the brain, a reflection of the external
world. The idealist elimination of the “dualism of mind and body”
_(i.e.,_ idealist monism) consists in the assertion that mind _is not_ a
function of the body, that, consequently, mind is primary, that the
“environment” and the “self” exist only in an inseparable connection of
one and the same “complexes of elements.” Apart from these two
diametrically opposed methods of eliminating “the dualism of mind and
body,” there can be no third method, unless it be eclecticism, which is
a senseless jumble of materialism and idealism. And it was this jumble
of Avenarius’ that seemed to Bogdanov and Co. “the truth transcending
materialism and idealism.”

But the professional philosophers are not as naïve and credulous as are
the Russian Machians. True, each of these professors-in-ordinary
advocates his “_own_” system of refuting materialism, or, at any rate,
of “reconciling” materialism and idealism. But when it comes to a
competitor they unceremoniously expose the unconnected fragments of
materialism and idealism that are contained in all the “recent” and
“original” systems. And if a few young intellectuals swallowed
Avenarius’ bait, that old bird Wundt was not to be enticed so easily.
The idealist Wundt tore the mask from the poseur Avenarius very
unceremoniously _when he praised him for the anti-materialist tendency
of the theory of introjection_. Wundt wrote:

  “If empirio-criticism reproaches vulgar materialism because by such
  expressions as the brain ‘has’ thought, or the brain ‘produces’
  thought, it expresses a relation which generally cannot be established
  by factual observation and description [evidently, for Wundt it is a
  “fact” that a person thinks without the help of a brain!]. . . this
  reproach, of course, is well founded” (op. cit., S pp. 47-48).

Well, of course! The idealists will always join the half-hearted
Avenarius and Mach in attacking materialism! It is only a pity, Wundt
goes on to say, that this theory of introjection “does not stand in any
relation to the doctrine of the independent vital series, and was, to
all appearances, only tacked on to it as an afterthought and in a rather
artificial fashion” (p. 365).

Introjection, says O. Ewald, “is to be regarded as nothing but a fiction
of empirio-criticism, which the latter requires in order to shield its
own fallacies” (op. cit., p. 44).

  “We observe a strange contradiction: on the one hand, the elimination
  of introjection and the restoration of the natural world conception is
  intended to restore to the world the character of living reality; on
  the other hand, in the principal co-ordination empirio-criticism is
  leading to a purely idealist theory of an absolute correlation of the
  counter-term and the central term. Avenarius is thus moving in a
  circle. He set out to do battle against idealism but laid down his
  arms before it came to an open skirmish. He wanted to liberate the
  world of objects from the yoke of the subject, but again bound that
  world to the subject. What he has actually destroyed by his criticism
  is a caricature of idealism rather than its genuine epistemological
  expression” _(ibid_., pp. 64-65).

"In his [Avenarius’] frequently quoted statement,” Norman Smith says,
“that the brain is not the seat, organ or supporter of thought, he
rejects the only terms which we possess for defining their connection”
(op. cit., p. 30).

Nor is it surprising that the theory of introjection approved by Wundt
excites the sympathy of the outspoken spiritualist, James Ward,^([1])
who wages systematic war on “naturalism and agnosticism, and especially
on Thomas Huxley (not because he was an insufficiently outspoken and
determined materialist, for which Engels reproached him, but) because
his agnosticism served in fact to conceal materialism.

Let us note that Karl Pearson, the English Machian, who avoid all
philosophical artifices, and who recognises neither introjection, nor
co-ordination, nor yet “the discovery of the world-elements,” arrives at
the inevitable outcome of Machism when it is stripped of such
“disguises,” namely, pure subjective idealism. Pearson knows no
“elements"; “sense impressions” are his alpha and omega. He never doubts
that man thinks with the help of the brain. And the contradiction
between this thesis (which alone conforms with science) and the basis of
his philosophy remains naked and obvious. Pearson spares no effort in
combating the concept that matter exists _independently_ of our
sense-impressions _(The Grammar of Science,_ Chap VII). Repeating all
Berkeley’s arguments, Pearson declare that matter is a nonentity. But
when he comes to speak of the relation of the brain to thought, Pearson
emphatically declares: “From will and consciousness associated with
material machinery we can infer nothing whatever as to will and
consciousness without that machinery.”^([2]) He even advances the
following thesis as a summary of his investigations in this field:

  “Consciousness has no meaning beyond nervous systems akin to our own;
  it is illogical to assert that all matter is conscious [but it is
  logical to assert that all matter possesses a property which is
  essentially akin to sensation, the property of reflection], still more
  that consciousness or will can exist outside matter” (_ibid_., p. 75,
  2nd thesis).

Pearson’s muddle is glaring! Matter is nothing but groups of sense
impressions. That is his premise, that is his philosophy. Hence,
sensation and thought should be primary; matter, secondary. But no,
consciousness without matter does not exist, and apparently not even
without a nervous system! That is, consciousness and sensation are
secondary. The waters rest on the earth, the earth rests on a whale, and
the whale rests on the waters. Mach’s “elements” and Avenarius’
co-ordination and introjection do not clear up this muddle, all they do
is to obscure the matter, to cover up traces with the help of an erudite
philosophical gibberish.

Just such gibberish, and of this a word or two will suffice, is the
special terminology of Avenarius, who coined a plenitude of diverse
“notals,” “securals,” “fidentials,” etc., etc. Our Russian Machians for
the most part shamefacedly avoid this professorial rigmarole, and only
now and again bombard the reader (in order to stun him) with an
“existential” and such like. But if naïve people take these words for a
species of bio-mechanics, the German philosophers, who are themselves
lovers of “erudite” words, laugh at Avenarius. To say “notal” _(notus_ =
known), or to say that this or the other thing is known to me, is
absolutely one and the same, says Wundt in the section entitled
“Scholastic Character of the Empirio-Critical System.” And, indeed, it
is the purest and most dreary scholasticism. One of Avenarius’ most
faithful disciples, R. Willy, had the courage to admit it frankly. He
says:

  “Avenarius dreamed of a bio-mechanics but an understanding of the life
  of the brain can be arrived at only by actual discoveries, and not by
  the way in which Avenarius attempted to arrive at it. Avenarius’
  bio-mechanics is not grounded on any new observations whatever; its
  characteristic feature is purely schematic constructions of concepts,
  and, indeed, constructions that do not even bear the nature of
  hypotheses that open up new vistas, but rather of stereotyped
  speculations _(blosse Spekulierschablonen),_ which, like a wall,
  conceal our view.”^([3])

The Russian Machians will soon be like fashion-lovers who are moved to
ecstasy over a hat which has already been discarded by the bourgeois
philosophers of Europe.

Notes

[1] James Ward, _Naturalism and Agnosticism,_ 3rd ed., London, 1906,
Vol. II, pp. 171-72. —_Lenin_

[2] _The Grammar of Science,_ 2nd ed., London, 1900, p. 58. —_Lenin_

[3] R. Willy, _Gegen die Schulweisheit,_ p. 169. Of course, the pedant
Petzoldt will not make any such admissions. With the smug satisfaction
of the philistine he chews the cud of Avenarius’ “biological”
scholasticism (Vol. I, Chap. II). —_Lenin_

[4] See F. Engels, Anti-Dürhring, Moscow, 1959, p. 55.

[5] See Karl Marx and F. Engels, Selected Works, Vol. II, Moscow, 1958,
pp. 363, 372.

[6] Lenin is referring to the literary portrait drawn by I. S. Turgenev
in his prose poem “A Rule of Life”.



MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM: CHAPTER 1.6, THE SOLIPSISM OF MACH AND AVENARIUS


The Solipsism of Mach and Avenarius

We have seen that the starting point and the fundamental premise of the
philosophy of empirio-criticism is subjective idealism. The world is our
sensation—this is the fundamental premise, which is obscured but in no
wise altered by the word “element” and by the theories of the
“independent series,” “co-ordination,” and “introjection.” The absurdity
of this philosophy lies in the fact that it leads to solipsism, to the
recognition of the existence of the philosophising individual only. But
our Russian Machians assure their readers that to “charge” Mach “with
idealism and even solipsism” is “extreme subjectivism.” So says Bogdanov
in the introduction to the Russian translation of _Analysis of
Sensations_ (p. xi), and the whole Machian troop repeat it in a great
variety of keys.

Having examined the methods whereby Mach and Avenarius disguise their
solipsism, we have now to add only one thing: the “extreme subjectivism”
of assertion lies entirely with Bogdanov and Co.; for in philosophical
literature writers of the most varied trends have long since disclosed
the fundamental sin of Machism beneath all its disguises. We shall
confine ourselves to a mere _summary_ of opinions which sufficiently
indicate the “subjective” _ignorance_ of our Machians. Let us note in
passing that nearly every professional philosopher sympathises with one
or another brand of idealism: in their eyes idealism is not a reproach,
as it is with us Marxists; but they point out Mach’s _actual_
philosophical trend and oppose one system of idealism by another system,
also idealist, but to them more consistent.

O. Ewald, in the book devoted to an analysis of Avenarius’ teachings,
writes:

  “The creator of empirio-criticism commits himself _volens nolens_ to
  solipsism” (loc. cit., pp. 61-62).

Hans Kleinpeter, a disciple of Mach with whom Mach in his preface to
_Erkenntnis und Irrtum_ explicitly declares his solidarity, says:

  “It is precisely Mach who is an example of the compatibility of
  epistemological idealism with the demands of natural science [for the
  eclectic everything is “compatible"!], and of the fact that the latter
  can very well start from solipsism without stopping there” _(Archiv
  für systematische Philosophie,_^([3]) Bd. VI, 1900, S. 87).

E. Lucka, analysing Mach’s _Analysis of Sensations,_ says:

  “Apart from this . . . misunderstandings _(Missverständnis)_ Mach
  adopts the ground of pure idealism. . . . It is incomprehensible that
  Mach denies that he is a Berkeleian” (_Kantstudien_,^([4]) Bd. VIII,
  1903, S. 416-17).

W. Jerusalem, a most reactionary Kantian with whom Mach in the
above-mentioned preface expresses his solidarity ("a closer kinship” of
thought than Mach had previously suspected—_Vorwort zu “Erkenntnis und
Irrtum,_” S. x, 1906) says: “Consistent phenomenalism leads to
solipsism.” And therefore one must borrow a little from Kant! (See _Der
kritische Idealismus und die reine Logik [Critical Idealism and Pure
Logic],_ 1905, S. 26.)

R. Hönigswald says:

  “. . . the immanentists and the empirio-criticists face the
  alternative of solipsism or metaphysics in the spirit of Fichte,
  Schelling, or Hegel” _(Ueber die Lehre Hume’s von der Realität der
  Aussendinge [Hume’s Doctrine of the Reality of the External World],_
  1904, S. 68).

The English physicist Oliver Lodge, in his book denouncing the
materialist Haeckel, speaks in passing, as though of something generally
known, of “solipsists such as Mach and Karl Pearson” (Sir Oliver Lodge,
_La vie et la matière [Life and Matter],_ Paris, 1907, p. 15).

_Nature_,^([5]) the organ of the English scientists, through the mouth
of the geometrician E. T. Dixon, pronounced a very definite opinion of
the Machian Pearson, one worth quoting, not because it is new, but
because the Russian Machians have naïvely accepted Mach’s philosophical
muddle as the “philosophy of natural science” (A. Bogdanov, introduction
to _Analysis of Sensations,_ p. xii, _et seq_). Dixon writes:

  “The foundation of the whole book, is the proposition that since we
  cannot directly apprehend anything but sense-impressions, therefore
  the things we commonly speak of as objective, or external to
  ourselves, and their variations, are nothing but groups of
  sense-impressions and sequences of such groups. But Professor Pearson
  admits the existence of other consciousness than his own, not only by
  implication in addressing his book to them, but explicitly in many
  passages.”

Pearson infers the existence of the consciousness of others by analogy,
by observing the bodily motions of other people; but since the
consciousness of others is real, the existence of people outside myself
must be granted!

  “Of course it would be impossible thus to refute a consistent
  idealist, who maintained that not only external things but all other
  consciousness were unreal and existed only in his imagination, but to
  recognise the reality of other consciousness is to recognise the
  reality of the means by which we become aware of them, which . . . is
  the external aspect of men’s bodies.”

The way out of the difficulty is to recognise the “hypothesis” that to
our sense-impressions there corresponds an objective reality outside of
us. This hypothesis satisfactorily explains our sense-impressions. “I
cannot seriously doubt that Professor Pearson himself believes in them
as much as anyone else. Only, if he were to acknowledge it explicitly,
he would have to rewrite almost every page of _The Grammar of
Science_.”^([1])

Ridicule—that is the response of the thinking scientists to the idealist
philosophy over which Mach waxes so enthusiastic.

And here, finally, is the opinion of a German physicist, L. Boltzmann.
The Machians will perhaps say, as Friedrich Adler said, that he is a
physicist of the old school. But we are concerned _now_ not with
theories of physics but with a fundamental philosophical problem.
Writing against people who “have been carried away by the new
epistemological dogmas,” Boltzmann says:

  “Mistrust of conceptions which we can derive only from immediate
  sense-impressions has led to an extreme which is the direct opposite
  of former naïve belief. Only sense-impressions are given us, and,
  therefore, it is said, we have no right to go a step beyond. But to be
  consistent, one must further ask: are our sense-impressions of
  yesterday also given? What is immediately given is only the one
  sense-impression, or only the one thought, namely, the one we are
  thinking at the present moment. Hence, to be consistent, one would
  have to deny not only the existence of other people outside one’s
  _self,_ but also all conceptions we ever had in the past.”^([2])

This physicist rightly ridicules the supposedly “new” “phenomenalist”
view of Mach and Co. as the old absurdity of philosophical subjective
idealism.

No, it is those who “failed to note” that solipsism is Mach’s
fundamental error who are stricken with “subjective” blindness.

Notes

[1] _Nature,_ July 21, 1892, p. 269. —_Lenin_

[2] Ludwig Boltzmann, _Populäre Schriften [Popular Essays),_ Leipzig,
1905, S. 132. _Cf_. S. 168, 177, 187, etc. —_Lenin_

[3] Archiv für systematische Philosophic (Archives of Systematic
Philosophy)—a journal of an idealist tendency published in Berlin from
1895 to 1931, being the second, independent section of the journal
Archiv für Philosophie (see Note 83). Its first editor was Paul Natorp.
From 1925 the journal was published under the title Archiv für
systematische Philosophic und Soziologie (Archives of Systematic
Philosophy and Sociology).

[4] _Kantstudien_ (_Kantian Studies_)—a German philosophical journal of
an idealist tendency, the organ of the neo-Kantians. It was founded by
Hans Vaihinger and published, with interruptions, from 1897 to 1944
(Hamburg-Berlin-Cologne). Publication was resumed in 1954. The journal
devotes considerable space to comments on Kant’s philosophy. Besides
neo-Kantians, its contributors included representatives of other
idealist trends.

[5] _Nature_—a weekly journal of natural sciences, published in London
from 1869.



MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM: CHAPTER 2.1, THE 'THING-IN-ITSELF,' OR V. CHERNOV REFUTES FREDERICK ENGELS


The 'Thing-In-Itself,' or V. Chernov Refutes Frederick Engels

Our Machians have written so much about the “thing-in itself” that were
all their writings to be collected they would result in mountains of
printed matter. The "thing-in-itself” is a veritable _bête noire_ with
Bogdanov and Valentinov, Bazarov and Chernov, Berman and Yushkevich.
There is no abuse they have not hurled at it, there is no ridicule they
have not showered on it. And against whom are they breaking lances
because of this luckless “thing-in-itself”? Here a division of the
philosophers of Russian Machism according to political parties begins.
All the would-be Marxists among the Machians are combating _Plekhanov’s_
“thing-in-itself"; they accuse Plekhanov of having become entangled and
straying into Kantianism, and of having forsaken Engels. (We shall
discuss the first accusation in the fourth chapter; the second
accusation we shall deal with now.) The Machian Mr. Victor Chernov, a
Narodnik and a sworn enemy of Marxism, opens a direct campaign _against
Engels_ because of the “thing-in-itself.”

One is ashamed to confess it, but it would be a sin to conceal the fact
that on this occasion open enmity towards Marxism has made Mr. Victor
Chernov a _more_ principled literary antagonist than our comrades in
party and opponents in philosophy.^([1]) For only a _guilty conscience_
(and in addition, perhaps, ignorance of materialism?) could have been
responsible for the fact that the Machian would-be Marxists have
diplomatically set Engels aside, have completely ignored Feuerbach and
are circling exclusively around Plekhanov. It is indeed circling around
one spot, tedious and petty pecking and cavilling at a disciple of
Engels, while a frank examination of the views of the teacher himself is
cravenly avoided. And since the purpose of these cursory comments is to
disclose the reactionary character of Machism and the correctness of the
materialism of Marx and Engels, we shall leave aside the fussing of the
Machian would-be Marxists with Plekhanov and turn directly to Engels,
whom the empirio-criticist Mr. V. Chernov refuted. In his _Philosophical
and Sociological Studies_ (Moscow, 1907—a collection of articles
written, with few exceptions, before 1900) the article “Marxism and
Transcendental Philosophy” bluntly begins with an attempt to set up Marx
against Engels and accuses the latter of “naïve dogmatic materialism,”
of “the crudest materialist dogmatism” (pp. 29 and 32). Mr. V. Chernov
states that a “sufficient” example of this is Engels’ argument against
the Kantian thing-in itself and Hume’s philosophical line. We shall
begin with this argument.

In his _Ludwig Feuerbach,_ Engels declares that the fundamental
philosophical trends are materialism and idealism. Materialism regards
nature as primary and spirit as secondary; it places being first and
thought second. Idealism holds the contrary view. This root distinction
between the “two great camps” into which the philosophers of the
“various schools” of idealism and materialism are divided Engels takes
as the cornerstone, and he directly charges with “confusion” those who
use the terms idealism and materialism in any other way.

“The great basic question of all philosophy,” Engels says, “especially
of modern philosophy, is that concerning the relation of thinking and
being,” of “spirit and nature.” Having divided the philosophers into
“two great camps” on this basic question, Engels shows that there is
“yet another side” to this basic philosophical question, _viz_., “in
what relation do our thoughts about the world surrounding us stand to
this world itself? Is our thinking capable of the cognition of the real
world? Are we able in our ideas and notions of the real world to produce
a correct reflection of reality? [Fr. Engels, _Ludwig Feuerbach,_ etc.,
4th Germ. ed., p. 15. Russian translation, Geneva ed., 1905, pp. 12-13.
Mr. V. Chernov translates the word _Spiegelbild_ literally (a mirror
reflection), accusing Plekhanov of presenting the theory of Engels “_in
a very weakened form_” by speaking in Russian simply of a “reflection”
instead of a “mirror reflection.” This is mere cavilling. _Spiegelbild_
in German is also used simply in the sense of _Abbild_]

“The overwhelming majority of philosophers give an affirmative answer to
this question,” says Engels, including under this head not only all
materialists but also the most consistent idealists, as, for example,
the absolute idealist Hegel, who considered the real world to be the
realisation of some premundane “absolute idea,” while the human spirit,
correctly apprehending the real world, apprehends in it and through it
the “absolute idea.”

  “In addition [i.e., to the materialists and the consistent idealists]
  there is yet a set of different philosophers—those who question the
  possibility of any cognition, or at least of an exhaustive cognition,
  of the world. To them, among the more modern ones, belong Hume and
  Kant, and they have played a very important role in philosophical
  development. . . .”^([2])

Mr. V. Chernov, quoting these words of Engels’, launches into the fray.
To the word “Kant” he makes the following annotation:

  “In 1888 it was rather strange to term such philosophers as Kant and
  especially Hume as ‘modern.’ At that time it was more natural to hear
  mentioned such names as Cohen, Lange, Riehl, Laas, Liebmann, Goring,
  etc. But Engels, evidently, was not well versed in ‘modern’
  philosophy” (op. cit., p. 33, note 2).

Mr. V. Chernov is true to himself. Equally in economic and philosophical
questions he reminds one of Turgenev’s Voroshilov,^([3]) annihilating
now the ignorant Kautsky, [V. Ilyin, _The Agrarian Question,_ Part I,
St. Petersburg, 1908, p. 1908.] now the ignorant Engels by merely
referring to “scholarly” names! The only trouble is that all the
authorities mentioned by Mr. Chernov are the very _Neo-Kantians_ whom
Engels refers to _on this very same page_ of his _Ludwig Feuerbach_ as
theoretical _reactionaries,_ who were endeavouring to resurrect the
corpse of the long since refuted doctrines of Kant and Hume. The good
Chernov did not understand that it is just these authoritative (for
Machism) and muddled professors whom Engels is refuting in his argument!

Having pointed out that Hegel had already presented the “decisive”
arguments against Hume and Kant, and that the additions made by
Feuerbach are more ingenious than profound, Engels continues:

  “The most telling refutation of this as of all other philosophical
  crotchets _(Schrullen)_ is practice, namely, experiment and industry.
  If we are able to prove the correctness of our conception of a natural
  process by making it ourselves, bringing it into being out of its
  conditions and making it serve our own purposes into the bargain, then
  there is an end to the Kantian incomprehensible [or ungraspable,
  _unfassbaren_—this important word is omitted both in Plekhanov’s
  translation and in Mr. V. Chernov’s translation] ‘thing-in-itself.’
  The chemical substances produced in the bodies of plants and animals
  remained just such ‘things-in-themselves’ until organic chemistry
  began to produce them one after another, where upon the
  ‘thing-in-itself’ became a ‘thing for us,’ as, for instance, alizarin,
  the colouring matter of the madder, which we no longer trouble to grow
  in the madder roots in the field, but produce much more cheaply and
  simply from coal tar” (op. cit., p. 16).^([4])

Mr. V. Chernov, quoting this argument, finally loses patience and
completely annihilates poor Engels. Listen to this:

  “No Neo-Kantian will of course be surprised that from coal tar we can
  produce alizarin ‘more cheaply and simply.’ But that together with
  alizarin it is possible to produce from this coal tar and just as
  cheaply a refutation of the ‘thing-in-itself’ will indeed seem a
  wonderful and unprecedented discovery—and not to the Neo-Kantians
  alone.

  Engels, apparently, having learned that according to Kant the
  ‘thing-in-itself’ is unknowable, turned this theorem into its converse
  and concluded that everything unknown is a thing-in-itself” (p. 33).

Listen, Mr. Machian: lie, but don’t overdo it! Why, before the very eyes
of the public you are misrepresenting the very quotation from Engels you
have set out to “tear to pieces,” without even having grasped the point
under discussion!

In the first place, it is not true that Engels “is producing a
refutation of the thing-in-itself.” Engels said explicitly and clearly
that he was refuting the _Kantian ungraspable_ (or unknowable)
thing-in-itself. Mr. Chernov confuses Engels’ materialist conception of
the existence of things independently of our consciousness. In the
second place, if Kant’s theorem reads that the thing-in-itself is
unknowable, the “_converse_” theorem would be: the _unknowable_ is the
thing in-itself. Mr. Chernov _replaces_ the unknowable by the _unknown,_
without realising that by such a substitution he has again confused and
distorted the materialist view of Engels!

Mr. V. Chernov is so bewildered by the reactionaries of official
philosophy whom he has taken as his mentors that he raises an outcry
against Engels _without in the least comprehending_ the meaning of the
example quoted. Let us try to explain to this representative of Machism
what it is all about.

Engels clearly and explicitly states that he is contesting both Hume and
Kant. Yet there is no mention whatever in Hume of “unknowable
things-in-themselves.” What then is there in common between these two
philosophers? It is that they both _in principle fence off_ “the
appearance” from that which appears, the perception from that which is
perceived the thing-for-us from the “thing-in-itself.” Furthermore, Hume
does not want to hear of the “thing-in-itself,” he regards the very
thought of it as philosophically inadmissible, as “metaphysics” (as the
Humeans and Kantians call it); whereas Kant grants the existence of the
“thing-in-itself,” but declares it to be “unknowable,” fundamentally
different from the appearance, belonging to a fundamentally different
realm, the realm of the “beyond” _(Jenseits),_ inaccessible to
knowledge, but revealed to faith.

What is the kernel of Engels’ objections? Yesterday we did not know that
coal tar contained alizarin. Today we learned that it does. The question
is, did coal tar contain alizarin yesterday?

Of course it did. To doubt it would be to make a mockery of modern
science.

And if that is so, three important epistemological conclusions follow:

1.  Things exist independently of our consciousness, independently of
    our perceptions, outside of us, for it is beyond doubt that alizarin
    existed in coal tar yesterday and it is equally beyond doubt that
    yesterday we knew nothing of the existence of this alizarin and
    received no sensations from it.
2.  There is definitely no difference in principle between the
    phenomenon and the thing-in-itself, and there can be no such
    difference. The only difference is between what is known and what is
    not yet known. And philosophical inventions of specific boundaries
    between the one and the other, inventions to the effect that the
    thing-in-itself is “beyond” phenomena (Kant), or that we can and
    must fence ourselves off by some philosophical partition from the
    problem of a world which in one part or another is still unknown but
    which exists outside us (Hume)—all this is the sheerest nonsense,
    _Schrulle,_ crotchet, invention.
3.  In the theory of knowledge, as in every other branch of science, we
    must think dialectically, that is, we must not regard our knowledge
    as ready-made and unalterable, but must determine how _knowledge_
    emerges from _ignorance,_ how incomplete, inexact knowledge becomes
    more complete and more exact.

Once we accept the point of view that human knowledge develops from
ignorance, we shall find millions of examples of it just as simple as
the discovery of alizarin in coal tar, millions of observations not only
in the history of science and technology but in the everyday life of
each and every one of us that illustrate the transformation of
“things-in-themselves” into “things-for-us,” the appearance of
“phenomena” when our sense-organs experience an impact from external
objects, the disappearance of “phenomena” when some obstacle prevents
the action upon our sense-organs of an object which we know to exist.
The sole and unavoidable deduction to be made from this—a deduction
which all of us make in everyday practice and which materialism
deliberately places at the foundation of its epistemology—is that
outside us, and independently of us, there exist objects, things, bodies
and that our perceptions are images of the external world. Mach’s
converse theory (that bodies are complexes of sensations) is nothing but
pitiful idealist nonsense. And Mr. Chernov, in his “analysis” of Engels,
once more revealed his Voroshilov qualities; Engels’ simple example
seemed to him “strange and naïve”! He regards only _gelehrte_ fiction as
genuine philosophy and is unable to distinguish professorial eclecticism
from the consistent materialist theory of knowledge.

It is both impossible and unnecessary to analyse Mr. Chernov’s other
arguments; they all amount to the same pretentious rigmarole (like the
assertion that for the materialists the atom is the thing-in-itself!).
We shall note only the argument which is relevant to our discussion (an
argument which has apparently led certain people astray), _viz_., that
Marx supposedly differed from Engels. The question at issue is Marx’s
_second_ Thesis on Feuerbach and Plekhanov’s translation of the word
_Diesseitigkeit_.

Here is the second Thesis:

  “The question whether objective truth can be attributed to human
  thinking is not a question of theory, but is a practical question. In
  practice man must prove the truth, i.e., the reality and power, the
  ‘this-sidedness’ of his thinking. The dispute over the reality or
  non-reality of thinking which is isolated from practice is a purely
  scholastic question.”^([5])

Instead of “prove the this-sidedness of thinking” (a literal
translation), Plekhanov has: prove that thinking “does not stop at this
side of phenomena.” And Mr. V. Chernov cries: “The contradiction between
Marx and Engels has been eliminated very simply. . . . It appears as
though Marx, like Engels, asserted the knowability of
things-in-themselves and the ‘other-sidedness’ of thinking” (loc. cit.
p. 34, note).

What can be done with a Voroshilov whose every phrase makes confusion
worse confoundedl It is sheer ignorance, Mr. Victor Chernov, not to know
that all materialists assert the knowability of things-in-themselves. It
is ignorance, Mr. Victor Chernov, or infinite slovenliness, to skip the
_very first_ phrase of the thesis and not to realise that the “objective
truth” _(gegenständliche Wahrheit)_ of thinking means _nothing else_
than the _existence_ of objects (i.e., “things-in-themselves”) _truly_
reflected by thinking. It is sheer illiteracy Mr. Victor Chernov, to
assert that from Plekhanov’s paraphrase (Plekhanov gave a paraphrase and
not a translation) “it appears as though” Marx defended the
_other-sidedness_ of thought. Because only the Humeans and the Kantians
confine thought to “this side of phenomena.” But for all materialists,
including those of the seventeenth century whom Bishop Berkeley
demolished (see Introduction), “phenomena” are “things-for-us” or
_copies_ of the “objects in themselves.” Of course, Plekhanov’s free
paraphrase is not obligatory upon those who desire to know Marx himself,
but it is obligatory to try to understand what Marx meant and not to
prance about like a Voroshilov.

It is interesting to note that while among people who call themselves
socialists we encounter an unwillingness or inability to grasp the
meaning of Marx’s “Theses,” bourgeois writers, specialists in
philosophy, sometimes manifest greater scrupulousness. I know of one
such writer who studied the philosophy of Feuerbach and in connection
with it Marx’s “Theses.” That writer is Albert Lévy, who devoted the
third chapter of the second part of his book on Feuerbach to an
examination of the influence of Feuerbach on Marx. [Albert Lévy, _La
philosophie de Feuerbach et son influence sur la littéruture allemande
[Feuerbach’s Philosophy and His Influence on German Literature]_ Paris,
1904, pp. 249-338, on the influence of Feuerbach on Marx, and pp.
290-98, an examination of the “Theses.”] Without going into the question
whether Lévy always interprets Feuerbach correctly, or how he criticises
Marx from the ordinary bourgeois standpoint, we shall only quote his
opinion of the philosophical content of Marx’s famous “Theses.”
Regarding the first Thesis, Lévy says:

  “Marx, on the one hand, together with all earlier materialism and with
  Feuerbach, recognises that there are real and distinct objects outside
  us corresponding to our ideas of things. . . .”

As the reader sees, it was immediately clear to Albert Levy that the
basic position not only of Marxist materialism but of every materialism,
of “_all earlier_” materialism, is the recognition of real objects
outside us, to which objects our ideas “correspond.” This elementary
truth, which holds good for all materialism in general, is unknown only
to the Russian Machians. Lévy continues:

  “. . . On the other hand, Marx expresses regret that materialism had
  left it to idealism to appreciate the importance of the active forces
  [i.e., human practice], which, according to Marx, must be wrested from
  idealism in order to integrate them into the materialist system. But
  it will of course be necessary to give these active forces the real
  and sensible character which idealism cannot grant them. Marx’s idea,
  then, is the following: just as to our ideas there correspond real
  objects outside us, so to our phenomenal activity there corresponds a
  real activity outside us, an activity of things. In this sense
  humanity partakes of the absolute, not only through theoretical
  knowledge but also through practical activity; thus all human activity
  acquires a dignity, a nobility, that permits it to advance hand in
  hand with theory. Revolutionary activity henceforth acquires a
  metaphysical significance. . . .”

Albert Lévy is a professor. And a proper professor must abuse the
materialists as being metaphysicians. For the professorial idealists,
Humeans and Kantians every kind of materialism is “metaphysics,” because
beyond the phenomenon (appearance, the thing-for-us) it discerns a
reality outside us. A. Lévy is therefore essentially right when he says
that in Marx’s opinion there corresponds to man’s “phenomenal activity”
“an activity of things,” that is to say, human practice has not only a
phenomenal (in the Humean and Kantian sense of the term), but an
objectively real significance. The criterion of practice—as we shall
show in detail in its proper place (§ 6)—has entirely different meanings
for Mach and Marx. “Humanity partakes of the absolute” means that human
knowledge reflects absolute truth ; the practice of humanity, by
verifying our ideas, corroborates what in those ideas corresponds to
absolute truth. A. Lévy continues:

  “. . . Having reached this point, Marx naturally encounters the
  objections of the critics. He has admitted the existence of
  things-in-themselves, of which our theory is the human translation. He
  cannot evade the usual objection: what assurance have you of the
  accuracy of the translation? What proof have you that the human mind
  gives you an objective truth? To this objection Marx replies in his
  second Thesis” (p. 291).

The reader sees that Lévy does not for a moment doubt that Marx
recognised the existence of things-in-themselves!

Notes

[1] In preparing the first edition of Materialism end Empirio-criticism
for the press, A. I. Ulyanova-Yelizarova altered the words “a more
honest literary antagonist” to “a more principled literary antagonist”.
Lenin objected to this correction and on February 27 (March 12), 1909,
he wrote to his sister: “Please do not tone down anything in the
passages against Bogdanov, Lenaeharsky and C0. Toning down is
impossible. You have done away with the statement that Cheraov is a
’more honest’ antagonist than they are, and that is a great pity. That
shade is not brought out. It is not in accord with the whole nature of
my accusations. The crux of the matter is that our Machists are
dishonest, basely craven enemies of Marxism in philosophy” (Collected
Works, present edition, Volume 37., p. 416).

[2] See K. Marx and F. Engels, _Selected Works,_ Vol. II, Moscow, 1958,
pp. 369-71.

[3] Lenin is referring to Voroshilov, a character depicted by I. S.
Turgenevirs his novel Smoke, as the type of a pseudo-learned dogmatist.
Lenin gave a description of him in his work “The Agrarian Question and
the ’Critics of Marx’” (see present edition, Vol. 5, p. 151).

[4] See F. Engels, Luduwig Feuerbach end the End of Classical German
Philosophy (K. Marx and F. Engels, _Selected Works,_ Volume 11, Moscow,
1958, p. 371).

[5] K. Marx, “Theses on Feuerbach” (K. Marx and F. Engels, _Selected
Works,_ Vol. II, Moscow, 1958, p. 403).



MATERIALISM AND EMPIRIO-CRITICISM: CHAPTER 2.


'Transcendence,' Or Bazarov 'Revises' Engels

But while the Russian Machian would-be Marxists diplomatically evaded
_one_ of the most emphatic and explicit statements of Engels, they
“revised” _another_ statement of his in quite the Chernov manner.
However tedious and laborious the task of correcting distortions and
perversions of the meaning of quotations may be, he who wishes to speak
of the Russian Machians cannot avoid it.

Here is Bazarov’s revision of Engels.

In the article “On Historical Materialism,” [This article forms the
Introduction to the English edition of Engels’ _Socialism: Utopian and
Scientific_ and was translated by Engels himself into German in the
_Neue Zeit_ XI, I (1892-93, No. 1), S. 15 _et seq_. The only Russian
translation, if I am not mistaken, is to be found in the symposium
_Historical Materialism_ p. 162, _et seq_. Bazarov quotes the passage in
the _Studies_ “_in” the Philosophy of Marxism,_ p. 64.] Engels speaks of
the English agnostics (philosophers of Hume’s trend of thought) as
follows:

  “. . . Our agnostic admits that all our knowledge is based upon the
  information _(Mitteilungen)_ imparted to us by our senses. . . .”

Let us note for the benefit of our Machians that the agnostic (Humean)
also starts from _sensations_ and recognises no other source of
knowledge. The agnostic is a pure “_positivist,_” be it said for the
benefit of the adherents of the “latest positivism!”

  “. . . But, he [the agnostic] adds, how do we know that our senses
  give us correct representations _(Abbilder)_ of the objects we
  perceive through them? And he proceeds to inform us that, whenever he
  speaks of objects or their qualities, he does in reality not mean
  these objects and qualities, of which he cannot know anything for
  certain, but merely the impressions which they have produced on his
  senses. . . .”^([1])

What two lines of philosophical tendency does Engels contrast here? One
line is that the senses give us faithful images of things, that we know
_the things themselves,_ that the outer world acts on our sense-organs.
This is materialism—with which the agnostic is not in agreement. What
then is the _essence_ of the agnostic’s line? It is that he _does not go
beyond_ sensations, that _he stops on this side of phenomena,_ refusing
to see anything “certain” beyond the boundary of sensations. About
_these things themselves_ (i.e., about the things-in-themselves, the
“objects in themselves,” as the materialists whom Berkeley opposed
called them), we can know nothing certain—so the agnostic categorically
insists. Hence, in the controversy of which Engels speaks the
materialist affirms the existence and knowability of
things-in-themselves. The agnostic _does not even admit the thought_ of
things-in-themselves and insists that we can know nothing certain about
them.

It may be asked in what way the position of the agnostic as outlined by
Engels differs from the position of Mach? In the “new” term “element”?
But it is sheer childishness to believe that a nomenclature can change a
philosophical line, that sensations when called “elements” cease to be
sensations! Or does the difference lie in the “new” idea that the very
same elements constitute the physical in one connection and the
psychical in another? But did you not observe that Engels’ agnostic
_also_ puts “impressions” in place of the “things themselves”? That
means that _in essence_ the agnostic too differentiates between physical
and psychical “_impressions_”! Here again the difference is
_exclusively_ one of nomenclature. When Mach says that objects _are_
complexes of sensations, Mach is a Berkeleian; when Mach “corrects”
himself, and says that “elements” (sensations) can be physical in one
connection and psychical in another, Mach is an agnostic, a Humean. Mach
does not go beyond these two _lines_ in his philosophy, and it requires
extreme naïveté to take this muddlehead at his word and believe that he
has actually “transcended” both materialism and idealism.

Engels deliberately mentions no names in his exposition, and criticises
not individual representatives of Humism (professional philosophers are
very prone to call original systems the petty variations one or another
of them makes in terminology or argument), but _the whole_ Humean line.
Engels criticises not particulars but the essential thing; he examines
the _fundamental_ wherein _all_ Humeans _deviate_ from materialism, and
his criticism therefore embraces Mill, Huxley and Mach alike. Whether we
say (with J. S. Mill) that matter is the permanent possibility of
sensation, or (with Ernst Mach) that matter is more or less stable
complexes of “elements”—sensations—we remain _within the bounds_ of
agnosticism, or Humism. Both standpoints, or more correctly both
formulations, are _covered_ by Engels’ exposition of agnosticism: the
agnostic does not go beyond sensations and asserts that he _cannot_ know
anything certain about their source, about their original, etc. And if
Mach attributes such great importance to his disagreement with Mill on
this question, it is because Mach comes under Engels’ characterisation
of a professor-in-ordinary: _Flohknacker_.— Ay, gentlemen, you have only
cracked a flea by making petty corrections and by altering terminology
instead of entirely abandoning the basic, half-hearted standpoint.

And how does the materialist Engels—at the beginning of the article
Engels explicitly and emphatically contrasts his materialism to
agnosticism—refute the foregoing arguments?

  “. . . Now, this line of reasoning seems undoubtedly hard to beat by
  mere argumentation. But before there was argumentation there was
  action. _Im Anfang war die That_. And human action had solved the
  difficulty long before human ingenuity invented it. The proof of the
  pudding is in the eating. From the moment we turn to our own use these
  objects, according to the qualities we perceive in them, we put to an
  infallible test the correctness or otherwise of our sense-perceptions.
  If these perceptions have been wrong, then our estimate of the use to
  which an object can be turned must also be wrong, and our attempt must
  fail. But if we succeed in accomplishing our aim, if we find that the
  object does agree with our idea of it, and does answer the purpose we
  intended it for, then that is positive proof that our perceptions of
  it and of its qualities, so far, agree with reality outside ourselves.
  . . .”

Thus, the materialist theory, the theory of the reflection of objects by
our mind, is here presented with absolute clarity: things exist outside
us. Our perceptions and ideas are their images. Verification of these
images, differentiation between true and false images, is given by
practice. But let us listen to a little more of Engels (Bazarov at this
point ends his quotation from Engels, or rather from Plekhanov, for he
deems it unnecessary to deal with Engels himself):

  “. . . And whenever we find ourselves face to face with a failure,
  then we generally are not long in making out the cause that made us
  fail; we find that the perception upon which we acted was either
  incomplete and superficial, or combined with the results of other
  perceptions in a way not warranted by them [the Russian translation in
  _On Historical Materialism_ is incorrect]. So long as we take care to
  train and to use our senses properly, and to keep our action within
  the limits prescribed by perceptions properly made and properly used,
  so long we shall find that the result of our action proves the
  conformity _(Uebereinstimmung)_ of our perceptions with the objective
  _(gegenstandlich)_ nature of the things perceived. Not in one single
  instance, so far, have we been led to the conclusion that our
  sense-perceptions, scientifically controlled, induce in our minds
  ideas respecting the outer world that are, by their very nature, at
  variance with reality, or that there is an inherent incompatibility
  between the outer world and our sense-perceptions of it.

  But then come the Neo-Kantian agnostics and say. . . .”^([2])

We shall leave to another time the examination of the arguments of the
Neo-Kantians. Let us remark here that anybody in the least acquainted
with the subject, or even the least bit attentive, cannot fail to
understand that Engels is here expounding the very same materialism
against which the Machians are always and everywhere doing battle. And
now just watch the manner in which Bazarov revises Engels:

“Here,” writes Bazarov in connection with the fragment of the quotation
we have given, “Engels is actually attacking Kantian idealism. . . .”

It is not true. Bazarov is muddling things. In the passage which he
quoted, and which is quoted by us more fully, there is _not a syllable
either_ about Kantianism or about idealism. Had Bazarov really read the
whole of Engels’ article, he could not have avoided seeing that Engels
speaks of Neo-Kantianism, and of Kant’s whole line, _only in the next_
paragraph, just where we broke off our quotation. And had Bazarov
attentively read and reflected on the fragment he himself quotes, he
could not have avoided seeing that in the arguments of the agnostic
which Engels here refutes there is _not a trace_ of either idealism or
Kantianism; for idealism begins only when the philosopher says that
things are our sensations, while Kantianism begins when the philosopher
says that the thing-in-itself exists but is unknowable. Bazarov confuses
Kantianism with Humism; and he confuses them because, being himself a
semi-Berkeleian, semi-Humean of the Machian sect, he does not understand
(as will be shown in detail below) the distinction between the Humean
and the materialist opposition to Kantianism.

Bazarov continues:

  “. . . But, alas! his argument is aimed against Plekhanov’s philosophy
  just as much as it is against Kantian philosophy. In the school of
  Plekhanov-Orthodox, as Bogdanov has already pointed out, there is a
  fatal misunderstanding regarding consciousness. To Plekhanov, as to
  all idealists, it seems that everything perceptually given, i.e.,
  cognised, is ‘subjective’; that to proceed only from what is factually
  given is to be a solipsist; that real being can be found only beyond
  the boundaries of everything that is immediately given. . . .”

This is entirely in the spirit of Chernov and his assurances that
Liebknecht was a true-Russian Narodnik! If Plekhanov is an idealist who
has deserted Engels, then why is it that you, who are supposedly an
adherent of Engels, are not a materialist? This is nothing but wretched
mystification, Comrade Bazarov! By means of the Machian expression
“_immediately given_” you begin to confuse the difference between
agnosticism, idealism and materialism. Don’t you understand that such
expressions as the “immediately given” and the “factually given” are
part of the rigmarole of the Machians, the immanentists, and the other
reactionaries in philosophy, a masquerade, whereby the agnostic (and
sometimes, as in Mach’s case, the idealist too) disguises himself in the
cloak of the materialist? For the materialist the “factually given” is
the outer world, the image of which is our sensations. For the idealist
the “factually given” is sensation, and the outer world is declared to
be a “complex of sensations.” For the agnostic the “immediately given”
is also sensation, but the agnostic _does not go on_ either to the
materialist recognition of the reality of the outer world, or to the
idealist recognition of the world as our sensation. Therefore your
statement that “real being [according to Plekhanov] can be found only
beyond the boundaries of _everything that is immediately given_” is
sheer nonsense and inevitably follows from your Machian position. But
while you have a perfect right to adopt any position you choose,
including a Machian one, you have no right to falsify Engels once you
have undertaken to speak of him. And from Engels’ words it is perfectly
clear that for the materialist real being lies _beyond_ the
“sense-perceptions,” impressions and ideas of man, while for the
agnostic it is impossible to go _beyond_ these perceptions. Bazarov
believed Mach, Avenarius, and Schuppe when they said that the
“immediately” (or factually) given connects the perceiving _self_ with
the perceived environment in the famous “indissoluble” co-ordination,
and endeavours, unobserved by the reader, to impute this nonsense to the
materialist Engels!

  “. . . It is as though the foregoing passage from Engels was
  deliberately written by him in a very popular and accessible form in
  order to dissipate this idealist misunderstanding. . . .”

Not for nought was Bazarov a pupil of Avenarius! He continues his
mystification: under the pretence of combating idealism (of which Engels
is not speaking here), he smuggles in the _idealist_ “co-ordination.”
Not bad, Comrade Bazarov!

  “. . . The agnostic asks, how do we know that our subjective senses
  give us a correct presentation of objects?. . .”

You are muddling things, Comrade Bazarov! Engels himself does not speak
of, and does not even ascribe to his foe the agnostic, such nonsense as
“_subjective_” senses. There are no other senses except human, i.e.,
“subjective” senses, for we are speaking from the standpoint of man and
not of a hobgoblin. You are again trying to impute Machism to Engels, to
imply that he says: the agnostic regards senses, or, to be more precise,
sensations, as _only_ subjective (which the agnostic does _not_ do!),
while we and Avenarius have “co-ordinated” the object into an
indissoluble connection with the subject. Not bad, Comrade Bazarov!

  “. . . But what do you term ‘correct’?—Engels rejoins.—That is correct
  which is confirmed by our practice; and consequently, since our
  sense-perceptions are confirmed by experience, they are not
  ‘subjective,’ that is, they are not arbitrary, or illusory, but
  correct and real as such. . . .”

You are muddling things, Comrade Bazarov! You have substituted for the
question of the existence of things outside our sensations, perceptions,
ideas, the question of the criterion of the correctness of our ideas of
“these things themselves,” or, more precisely, you are _hedging_ the
former question with the help of the latter. But Engels says explicitly
and clearly that what distinguishes him from the agnostic is not only
the agnostic’s doubt as to whether our images are “correct,” but also
the agnostic’s doubt as to whether we may speak of the _things
themselves,_ as to whether we may have “certain” knowledge of their
existence. Why did Bazarov resort to this juggling? In order to obscure
and confound what is the _basic_ question for materialism (and for
Engels, as a materialist), _viz_., the question of the existence of
things outside our mind, which, by acting on our sense-organs evoke
sensations. It is impossible to be a materialist without answering this
question in the affirmative; but one can be a materialist and still
differ on what constitutes the criterion of the correctness of the
images presented by our senses.

And Bazarov muddles matters still more when he attributes to Engels, in
the dispute with the agnostic, the absurd and ignorant expression that
our sense-perceptions are confirmed by “_experience_.” Engels did not
use and could not have used this word _here,_ for Engels _was well
aware_ that the idealist Berkeley, the agnostic Hume and the materialist
Diderot all had recourse to experience.

  “. . . Inside the limits within which we have to do with objects in
  practice, _perceptions of the object and of its properties coincide
  with the reality existing outside us_. ‘To coincide’ is somewhat
  different from being a ‘hieroglyphic.’ ‘They coincide’ means that,
  within the given limits, the sense perception _is_ [Bazarov’s italics]
  the reality existing outside us. . . .”

The end crowns the work! Engels has been treated _à la_ Mach, fried and
served with a Machian sauce. But take care you do not choke, worthy
cooks!

“Sense-perception _is_ the reality existing outside us”!! This _is_ just
the fundamental absurdity, the fundamental muddle and falsity of
Machism, from which flows all the rest of the balderdash of this
philosophy and for which Mach and Avenarius have been embraced by those
arrant reactionaries and preachers of priestlore, the immanentists.
However much V. Bazarov wriggled, however cunning and diplomatic he was
in evading ticklish points, in the end he gave himself away and betrayed
his true Machian character! To say that “sense-perception is the reality
existing outside us” _is to return to Humism,_ _or even Berkeleianism,_
concealing itself in the fog of “co-ordination.” This is either an
idealist lie or the subterfuge of the agnostic, Comrade Bazarov, for
sense-perception _is not_ the reality existing outside us, it is only
the _image_ of that reality. Are you trying to make capital of the
ambiguous Russian word _sovpadat_? Are you trying to lead the
unsophisticated reader to believe that _sovpadat_ here means “to be
identical,” and not “to correspond”? That means basing one’s
falsification of Engels _à la_ Mach on a perversion of the meaning of a
quotation, and nothing more.

Take the German original and you will find there the words _stimmen
mit,_ which means to correspond with, “to voice with”—the latter
translation is literal, for _Stimme_ means voice. The words “_stimmen
mit_” cannot mean “to coincide” in the sense of “_to be_ identical.” And
even for the reader who does not know German but who reads Engels with
the least bit of attention, it is perfectly clear, it cannot be
otherwise than clear, that Engels throughout his whole argument treats
the expression “sense-perception” as the _image (Abbild)_ of the reality
existing outside us, and that therefore the word “coincide” can be used
in Russian exclusively in the sense of “correspondence,” “concurrence,”
etc. To attribute to Engels the thought that “sense-perception _is_ the
reality existing outside us” is such a pearl of Machian distortion, such
a flagrant attempt to palm off agnosticism and idealism as materialism,
that one must admit that Bazarov has broken all records!

One asks, how can sane people in sound mind and judgment assert that
“sense-perception [within what limits is not important] is the reality
existing outside us”? The earth is a reality existing outside us. It
cannot “coincide” (in the sense of being identical) with our
sense-perception, or be in indissoluble co-ordination with it, or be a
“complex of elements” in another connection identical with sensation;
for the earth existed at a time when there were no men, no sense-organs,
no matter organised in that superior form in which its property of
sensation is in any way clearly perceptible.

That is just the point, that the tortuous theories of “co-ordination,”
“introjection,” and the newly-discovered world elements which we
analysed in Chapter I serve to cover up this idealist absurdity.
Bazarov’s formulation, so inadvertently and incautiously thrown off by
him, is excellent in that it patently reveals that crying absurdity,
which otherwise it would have been necessary to excavate from the piles
of erudite, pseudo-scientific, professorial rigmarole.

All praise to you, Comrade Bazarov! We shall erect a monument to you in
your lifetime. On one side we shall engrave your dictum, and on the
other: “To the Russian Machian who dug the grave of Machism among the
Russian Marxists!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

We shall speak separately of the two points touched on by Bazarov in the
above-mentioned quotation, _viz_., the criteria of practice of the
agnostics (Machians included) and the materialists, and the difference
between the theory of reflection (or images) and the theory of symbols
(or hieroglyphs). For the present we shall continue to quote a little
more from Bazarov:

  “. . . But what is beyond these boundaries? Of this Engels does not
  say a word. He nowhere manifests a desire to perform that
  ‘transcendence,’ that stepping beyond the boundaries of the
  perceptually-given world, which lies at the foundation of Plekhanov’s
  ‘theory of knowledge’. . . .”

Beyond what “boundaries”? Does he mean the boundaries of the
“co-ordination” of Mach and Avenarius, which supposedly indissolubly
merges the _self_ with the environment, the subject with the object? The
very question put by Bazarov is devoid of meaning. But if he had put the
question in an intelligible way, he would have clearly seen that the
external world lies “beyond the boundaries” of man’s sensations,
perceptions and ideas. But the word “transcendence” once more betrays
Bazarov. It is a specifically Kantian and Humean “fancy” to erect _in
principle_ a boundary between the _appearance_ and the
_thing-in-itself_. To pass from the appearance, or, if you will, from
our sensation, perception, etc., to the thing existing outside of
perception is a _transcendence,_ Kant says; and _transcendence_ is
permissible not to knowledge but to faith. Transcendence is not
permissible at all, Hume objects. And the Kantians, like the Humeans,
call the materialists _transcendental_ realists, “metaphysicians,” who
effect an illegitimate _passage_ (in Latin, _transcensus)_ from one
region to another, fundamentally different, region. In the works of the
contemporary professors of philosophy who follow the reactionary line of
Kant and Hume, you may encounter (take only the names enumerated by
Voroshilov-Chernov) endless repetitions made in a thousand keys of the
charge that materialism is “metaphysical” and “transcendent.” Bazarov
borrowed from the reactionary professors both the word and the line of
thought, and flourishes them in the name of “recent positivism”! As a
matter of fact the very idea of the “transcendence,” i.e., of a boundary
_in principle_ between the appearance and the thing-in-itself, is a
nonsensical idea of the agnostics (Humeans and Kantians included) and
the idealists. We have already explained this in connection with Engels’
example of alizarin, and we shall explain it again in the words of
Feuerbach and Joseph Dietzgen. But let us first finish with Bazarov’s
“revision” of Engels:

  “. . . In one place in his _Anti-Dühring,_ Engels says that ‘being’
  outside of the realm of perception is an _offene Frage,_ i.e., a
  question, for the answer to which, or even for the asking of which we
  have no data.”

Bazarov repeats this argument after the German Machian, Friedrich Adler.
This last example is perhaps even worse than the “sense-perception”
which “is the reality existing outside us.” In his _Anti-Dühring,_ p. 31
(5th Germ. ed.), Engels says:

  “The unity of the world does not consist in its being, although its
  being is a pre-condition of its unity, as it must certainly first
  _be,_ before it can be _one_. Being, indeed, is always an open
  question _(offene Frage)_ beyond the point where our sphere of
  observation _(Gesichtskreis)_ ends. The real unity of the world
  consists in its materiality, and this is proved not by a few juggling
  phrases, but by a long and wearisome development of philosophy and
  natural science.”^([3])

Behold the new hash our cook has prepared. Engels is speaking of being
_beyond_ the point where our sphere of observation ends, for instance,
the existence of men on Mars. Obviously, such being is indeed an open
question. And Bazarov, as though deliberately refraining from giving the
full quotation, paraphrases Engels as saying that “_being beyond the
realm of perception_” is an open question!! This is the sheerest
nonsense and Engels is here being saddled with the views of those
professors of philosophy whom Bazarov is accustomed to take at their
word and whom Dietzgen justly called the graduated flunkeys of
clericalism or fideism. Indeed, fideism positively asserts that
something does exist “beyond the world of perception.” The materialists,
in agreement with natural science, vigorously deny this. An intermediate
position is held by those professors, Kantians, Humeans (including the
Machians), etc., “who have found the truth outside materialism and
idealism” and who “compromise,” saying: it is an open question. Had
Engels ever said anything like this, it would be a shame and disgrace to
call oneself a Marxist.

But enough! Half a page of quotation from Bazarov presents such a
complete tangle that we are obliged to content ourselves with what has
already been said and not to continue following all the waverings of
Machian thought.



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 3. L. FEUERBACH AND J. DIETZGEN ON THE THING-IN-ITSELF


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Two: The Theory of Knowledge of Empirio-Criticism and of Dialectical Materialism. II )

3. L. Feuerbach and J. Dietzgen on the Thing-In-Itself

To show how absurd are the assertions of our Machians that the
materialists Marx and Engels denied the existence of
things-in-themselves (i.e., things outside our sensations,  
perceptions, and so forth) and the possibility of their cognition, and
that they admitted the existence of an absolute boundary between the
appearance and the thing-in-itself, we shall give a few more quotations
from Feuerbach. The whole trouble with our Machians is that they set
about parroting the words of the reactionary professors on dialectical
materialism without themselves knowing anything _either_ of dialectics
_or_ of materialism.

“Modern philosophical spiritualism,” says Feuerbach, “which calls itself
idealism, utters the annihilating, in its own opinion, stricture against
materialism that it is dogmatism, _viz_., that it starts from the
sensuous _(sinnlichen)_ world as though from an undisputed
_(ausgemacht)_ objective truth, and assumes that it is a world in itself
_(an sich),_ i.e., as existing without us, while in reality the world is
only a product of spirit” _(Sämtliche Werke,_ X. Band, 1866, S. 185).

This seems clear enough. The world in itself is a world that exists
_without us_. This materialism of Feuerbach’s, like the materialism of
the seventeenth century contested by Bishop Berkeley, consisted in the
recognition that “objects in themselves” exist outside our mind. The _an
sich_ (of itself, or “in itself”) of Feuerbach is the direct opposite of
the _an sich_ of Kant. Let us recall the excerpt from Feuerbach already
quoted, where he rebukes Kant because for the latter the
“thing-in-itself” is an “abstraction without reality.” For Feuerbach the
“thing-in-itself” is an “abstraction _with_ reality,” that is, a world
existing outside us, completely knowable and fundamentally not different
from “appearance.”

Feuerbach very ingeniously and clearly explains how ridiculous it is to
postulate a “transcendence” from the world of phenomena to the world in
itself, a sort of impassable gulf created by the priests and taken over
from them by the professors of philosophy. Here is one of his
explanations:

“Of course, the products of fantasy are also products of nature, for the
force of fantasy, like all other human forces, is in the last analysis
_(zuletzt)_ both in its basis and in its origin a force of nature;
nevertheless, a human being is a being distinguished from the sun, moon
and stars, from stones, animals and plants, in a word, from those beings
_(Wesen)_ which he designates by the general name, ‘nature’;   and
consequently, man’s presentations _(Bilder)_ of the sun, moon and stars
and the other beings of nature _(Naturwesen),_ although these
presentations are products of nature, are yet products distinct from
their objects in nature” _(Werke,_ Band VII, Stuttgart, 1903, S. 516).

The objects of our ideas are distinct from our ideas, the
thing-in-itself is distinct from the thing-for-us, for the latter is
only a part, or only one aspect, of the former, just as man himself is
only a fragment of the nature reflected in his ideas.

“. . . The taste-nerve is just as much a product of nature as salt is,
but it does not follow from this that the taste of salt is directly as
such an objective property of salt, that what salt is merely as an
object of sensation it also is in itself _(an und für sich),_ hence that
the sensation of salt on the tongue is a property of salt thought of
without sensation _(des ohne Empfindung gedachten Salzes)_. . . .” And
several pages earlier: “Saltiness, as a taste, is the subjective
expression of an objective property of salt” (ibid, p. 514).

Sensation is the result of the action of a thing-in-itself, existing
objectively outside us, upon our sense-organs—such is Feuerbach’s
theory. Sensation is a subjective image of the objective world, of the
world _an und für sich_.

“. . . So is man also a being of nature _(Naturwesen),_ like sun, star,
plant, animal, and stone, nevertheless, he is distinct from nature, and,
consequently, nature in the head and heart of man is distinct from
nature outside the human head and heart.”

“. . . However, this object, _viz_., man, is the only object in which,
according to the statement of the idealists themselves, the requirement
of the ‘identity of object and subject’ is realised; for man is an
object whose equality and unity with my being are beyond all possible
doubt. . . . And is not one man for another, even the most intimate, an
object of fantasy, of the imagination? Does not each man comprehend
another in his own way, after his own mind _(in und nach seinem Sinne)_?
. . . And if even between man and man, between mind and mind, there is a
very considerable difference which it is impossible to ignore, how much
greater must be the difference between an unthinking, non-human,
dissimilar (to us) being in itself _(Wesen an sich)_ and the   same
being as we think of it, perceive it and apprehend it?” _(ibid_., p.
518).

All the mysterious, sage and subtle distinctions between the phenomenon
and the thing-in-itself are sheer philosophical balderdash. In practice
each one of us has observed times without number the simple and palpable
transformation of the “thing-in-itself” into phenomenon, into the
“thing-for-us.” It is precisely this transformation that is cognition.
The “doctrine” of Machism that since we know _only_ sensations, we
cannot know of the _existence_ of anything beyond the bounds of
sensation, is an old sophistry of idealist and agnostic philosophy
served up with a new sauce.

Joseph Dietzgen is a dialectical materialist. We shall show below that
his mode of expression is often inexact, that he is often not free from
confusion, a fact which has been seized upon by various foolish people
(Eugen Dietzgen among them) and of course by our Machians. But they did
not take the trouble or were unable to analyse the dominant line of his
philosophy and to disengage his materialism from alien elements.

“Let us take the world as the ‘thing-in-itself,’” says Dietzgen in his
_The Nature of the Workings of the Human Mind_. “We shall easily see
that the ‘world _in itself’_ and the world as it _appears_ to us, the
phenomena of the world, differ from each other only as the whole differs
from its parts” (Germ. ed., 1903, p. 65). “A phenomenon differs no more
and no less from the thing which produces it than the ten-mile stretch
of a road differs from the road itself” (pp. 71-72). There is not, nor
can there be, any essential difference here, any “transcendence,” or
“innate disagreement.” But a difference there is, to be sure, _viz_.,
the passage _beyond the_ _bounds_ of sense-perceptions to the existence
of things outside us.

“We learn by experience _(wir erfahren),_” says Dietzgen in his
_Excursions of a Socialist into the Domain of the Theory of Knowledge,_
“that each experience is only a part of that which, in the words of
Kant, passes beyond the bounds of all experience. . . . For a
consciousness that has become conscious of its own nature, each
particle, be it of dust, or of   stone, or of wood, is something
_unknowable in its full extent (Unauskenntliches),_ i.e., each particle
is inexhaustible material for the human faculty of cognition and,
consequently, something which passes beyond experience” _(Kleinere
philosophische Schriften [Smaller Philosophical Essays],_ 1903, S. 199).

You see: _in the words of Kant,_ i.e., adopting—exclusively for purposes
of popularisation, for purposes of contrast—Kant’s _erroneous,_
confusing terminology, Dietzgen recognises the passage “beyond
experience.” This is a good example of what the Machians are grasping at
when they pass from materialism to agnosticism: you see, they say, we do
not wish to go “beyond experience”, for us “sense-perception _is_ the
reality existing outside us.”

“Unhealthy mysticism [Dietzgen says, objecting precisely to such a
philosophy] unscientifically separates the absolute truth from the
relative truth. It makes of the thing as it appears and the
‘thing-in-itself,’ that is, of the appearance and the verity, two
categories which differ _toto coelo_ [completely, fundamentally] from
each other and are not contained in any common category” (S. 200).

We can now judge the knowledge and ingenuity of Bogdanov, the Russian
Machian, who does not wish to acknowledge himself a Machian and wishes
to be regarded as a Marxist in philosophy.

“A golden mean [between “panpsychism and panmaterialism”] has been
adopted by materialists of a more critical shade who have rejected the
_absolute_ unknowability of the ‘thing-in-itself,’ but at the same time
regard it as being _fundamentally_ [Bogdanov’s italics] different from
the ‘phenomenon’ and, therefore, always only ‘dimly discernible’ in it,
outside of experience as far as its content is concerned [that is,
presumably, as far as the “elements” are concerned, which are not the
same as elements of experience], but yet lying within the bounds of what
is called the forms of experience, i.e., time, space and causality. Such
is approximately the standpoint of the French materialists of the
eighteenth century and among the modern philosophers—Engels and his
Russian follower, Beltov^([1])” _(Empirio-Monism,_ Bk. II, 2nd ed.,
1907, pp. 40-41).

This is a complete muddle. 1) The materialists of the _seventeenth
century,_ against whom Berkeley argues, hold that “objects in
themselves” are absolutely knowable, for our presentations, ideas, are
only copies or reflections of those objects, which exist “outside the
mind” (see Introduction). 2) _Feuerbach,_ and J. Dietzgen after him,
vigorously dispute any “fundamental” difference between the
thing-in-itself and the phenomenon, and Engels disposes of this view by
his brief example of the transformation of the “thing-in-itself” into
the “thing-for-us.” 3) Finally, to maintain that the materialists regard
things-in-themselves as “always only dimly discernible in the
phenomenon” is sheer nonsense, as we have seen from Engels’ refutation
of the agnostic. The reason for Bogdanov’s distortion of materialism
lies in his failure to understand the relation of absolute truth to
relative truth (of which we shall speak later). As regards the
“outside-of-experience” thing-in-itself and the “elements of
experience,” these are already the beginnings of the Machian muddle of
which we have already said enough.

Parroting the incredible nonsense uttered by the reactionary professors
about the materialists, disavowing Engels in 1907, and attempting to
“revise” Engels into agnosticism in 1908—such is the philosophy of the
“recent positivism” of the Russian Machians!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] _Beltov, N._-a pseudonym of G. V. Plekhanov.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 4. DOES OBJECTIVE TRUTH EXIST?


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Two: The Theory of Knowledge of Empirio-Criticism and of Dialectical Materialism. II )

4. Does Objective Truth Exist?

Bogdanov declares: “As I understand it, Marxism contains a denial of the
unconditional objectivity of any truth whatsoever, the denial of all
eternal truths” _(Empirio-Monism,_ Bk. III, pp. iv-v). What is meant by
“_unconditional_ objectivity”? “Truth for all eternity” is “an objective
truth in the absolute meaning of the word,” says Bogdanov in the same
passage, and agrees to recognise “objective truth only within the limits
of a given epoch.”

Two questions are obviously confused here: 1) Is there such a thing as
objective truth, that is, can human ideas have a content that does not
depend on a subject, that does not depend either on a human being, or on
humanity? 2) If so, can human ideas, which give expression to objective
truth, express it all at one time, as a whole, unconditionally,
absolutely, or only approximately, relatively? This second   question is
a question of the relation of absolute truth to relative truth. Bogdanov
replies to the second question clearly, explicitly and definitely by
rejecting even the slightest admission of absolute truth and by accusing
Engels of _eclecticism_ for making such an admission. Of this discovery
of eclecticism in Engels by A. Bogdanov we shall speak separately later
on. For the present we shall confine ourselves to the first question,
which Bogdanov, without saying so explicitly, likewise answers in the
negative—for although it is possible to deny the element of relativity
in one or another human idea without denying the existence of objective
truth, it is impossible to deny absolute truth without denying the
existence of objective truth. “. . . The criterion of objective truth,”
writes Bogdanov a little further on (p. ix), “in Beltov’s sense, does
not exist truth is an ideological form, an organising form of human
experience. . . .” Neither “Beltov’s sense”—for it is a question of one
of the fundamental philosophical problems and not of Beltov—nor the
criterion of truth—which must be treated separately, without confounding
it with the question of whether objective truth _exists_—has anything to
do with the case here. Bogdanov’s negative answer to the latter question
is clear: if truth is _only_ an ideological form, then there can be no
truth independent of the subject, of humanity, for neither Bogdanov nor
we know any other ideology but human ideology. And Bogdanov’s negative
answer emerges still more clearly from the second half of his statement:
if truth is a form of human experience, then there can be no truth
independent of humanity; there can be no objective truth.

Bogdanov’s denial of objective truth is agnosticism and subjectivism.
The absurdity of this denial is evident even from the single example of
a scientific truth quoted above. Natural science leaves no room for
doubt that its assertion that the earth existed prior to man is a truth.
This is entirely compatible with the materialist theory of knowledge:
the existence of the thing reflected independent of the reflector (the
independence of the external world from the mind) is a fundamental tenet
of materialism. The   assertion made by science that the earth existed
prior to man is an objective truth. This proposition of natural science
is incompatible with the philosophy of the Machians and with their
doctrine of truth: if truth is an organising form of human experience,
then the assertion that the earth exists _outside_ human experience
cannot be true.

But that is not all. If truth is only an organising form of human
experience, then the teachings, say, of Catholicism are also true. For
there is not the slightest doubt that Catholicism is an “organising form
of human experience.” Bogdanov himself senses the crying falsity of his
theory and it is extremely interesting to watch how he attempts to
extricate himself from the swamp into which he has fallen.

“The basis of objectivity,” we read in Book I of _Empirio-Monism,_ “must
lie in the sphere of collective experience. We term those data of
experience objective which have the same vital meaning for us and for
other people, those data upon which not only we construct our activities
without contradiction, but upon which, we are convinced, other people
must also base themselves in order to avoid contradiction. The objective
character of the physical world consists in the fact that it exists not
for me personally, but for everybody [that is not true! It exists
_independently_ of “everybody”!], and has a definite meaning for
everybody, the same, I am convinced, as for me. The objectivity of the
physical series is its _universal significance_” (p. 25, Bogdanov’s
italics). “The objectivity of the physical bodies we encounter in our
experience is in the last analysis established by the mutual
verification and coordination of the utterances of various people. In
general, the physical world is socially-co-ordinated,
socially-harmonised, in a word, _socially-organised experience_” (p. 36,
Bogdanov’s italics).

We shall not repeat that this is a fundamentally untrue, idealist
definition, that the physical world exists independently of humanity and
of human experience, that the physical world existed at a time when no
“sociality” and no “organisation” of human experience was possible, and
so forth. We shall now on an exposure of the Machian philosophy from
another aspect, namely, that objectivity is so defined that religious
doctrines, ‘which undoubtedly possess a “universal significance”, and so
forth, come under the definition.   But listen to Bogdanov again: “We
remind the reader once more that ‘objective’ experience is by no means
the same as ‘social’ experience.... Social experience is far from being
altogether socially organised and always contains various
contradictions, so that certain of its parts do not agree with others.
Sprites and hobgoblins may exist in the sphere of social experience of a
given people or of a given group of people-for example, the peasantry;
but they need not therefore be included under socially-organised or
objective experience, for they do not harmonise with the rest of
collective experience and do not fit in with its organising forms, for
example, with the chain of causality” (45).

Of course it is very gratifying that Bogdanov himself “does not include”
social experience in regard to sprites and hobgoblins under objective
experience. But this well-meant amendment in the spirit of anti-fideism
by no means corrects the fundamental error of Bogdanov’s whole position.
Bogdanov’s definition of objectivity and of the physical world
completely falls to the ground, since the religious doctrine has
“universal significance” to a greater degree than the scientific
doctrine; the greater part of mankind cling to the former doctrine to
this day. Catholicism has been “socially organised, harmonised and
co-ordinated” by centuries of development; it _“fits in”_ with the
“chain of causality” in the most indisputable manner; for religions did
not originate without cause, it is not by accident that they retain
their hold over the masses under modern conditions, and it is quite “in
the order of things” that professors of philosophy should adapt
themselves to them. If this undoubtedly universally significant and
undoubtedly highly-organised religious social experience does “not
harmonise” with the “experience” of science, it is because there is a
radical and fundamental difference between the two, which Bogdanov
obliterated when he rejected objective truth. And however much Bogdanov
tries to “correct” himself by saying that fideism, or clericalism, does
not harmonise with science, the undeniable fact remains that Bogdanov’s
denial of objective truth completely “harmonises” with fideism.
Contemporary fideism does not at all reject science; all it rejects is
the “exaggerated claims” of science, to wit, its claim to objective
truth. If objective truth exists (as   the materialists think), if
natural science, reflecting the outer world in human “experience,” is
alone capable of giving us objective truth, then all fideism is
absolutely refuted. But if there is no objective truth, if truth
(including scientific truth) is only an organising form of human
experience, then this in itself is an admission of the fundamental
premise of clericalism, the door is thrown open for it, and a place is
cleared for the “organising forms” of religious experience.

The question arises, does this denial of objective truth belong
personally to Bogdanov, who refuses to own himself a Machian, or does it
follow from the fundamental teachings of Mach and Avenarius? The latter
is the only possible answer to the question. If only sensation exists in
the world (Avenarius in 1876), if bodies are complexes of sensations
(Mach, in the _Analysis of Sensations),_ then we are obviously
confronted with a philosophical subjectivism which inevitably leads to
the denial of objective truth. And if sensations are called “elements”
which in one connection give rise to the physical and in another to the
psychical, this, as we have seen, only confuses but does not reject the
fundamental point of departure of empirio-criticism. Avenarius and Mach
recognise sensations as the source of our knowledge. Consequently, they
adopt the standpoint of empiricism (all knowledge derives from
experience) or sensationalism (all knowledge derives from sensations).
But this standpoint gives rise to the difference between the fundamental
philosophical trends, idealism and materialism and does not eliminate
that difference, no matter in what “new” verbal garb (“elements”) you
clothe it. Both the solipsist, that is, the subjective idealist, and the
materialist may regard sensations as the source of our knowledge. Both
Berkeley and Diderot started from Locke. The first premise of the theory
of knowledge undoubtedly is that the sole source of our knowledge is
sensation. Having recognised the first premise, Mach confuses the second
important premise, i.e., regarding the objective reality that is given
to man in his sensations, or that forms the source of man’s sensations.
Starting from sensations, one may follow the line of subjectivism, which
leads to solipsism (“bodies are complexes or combinations of
sensations”), or the line of objectivism, which leads to   materialism
(sensations are images of objects, of the external world). For the first
point of view, i.e., agnosticism, or, pushed a little further,
subjective idealism, there can be no objective truth. For the second
point of view, i.e., materialism, the recognition of objective truth is
essential. This old philosophical question of the two trends, or rather,
of the two possible deductions from the premises of empiricism and
sensationalism, is not solved by Mach, it is not eliminated or overcome
by him, but is _muddled_ by verbal trickery with the word “element,” and
the like. Bogdanov’s denial of objective truth is an inevitable
consequence of Machism as a whole, and not a deviation from it.

Engels in his _Ludwig Feuerbach_ calls Hume and Kant philosophers “who
question the possibility of any cognition, or at least of an exhaustive
cognition, of the world.” Engels, therefore, lays stress on what is
common both to Hume and Kant, and not on what divides them. Engels
states further that “what is decisive in the refutation of this [Humean
and Kantian] view has already been said by Hegel” (4th Germ. ed.,
pp. 15–16).^([1]) In this connection it seems to me not uninteresting to
note that Hegel, declaring _materialism_ to be “a consistent system of
empiricism,” wrote: “For empiricism the external _(das Ausserliche)_ in
general is the truth, and if then a supersensible too be admitted,
nevertheless knowledge of it cannot occur _(soll doch eine Erkenntnis
desselben [d_. _h_. _des Uebersinnlichen] nicht stattfinden können)_ and
one must keep exclusively to what belongs to perception _(das der
Wahrnehmung Angehörige)_. However, this principle in its realisation
_(Durchführung)_ produced what was subsequently termed materialism. This
materialism regards matter, as such, as the truly objective _(das
wahrhaft Objektive)_.”[Hegel, _Encyklopädie der philosophischen
Wissenschaften im Grundrisse [Encyclopaedia of the Philosophical
Sciences in Outline],_ _Werke,_ VI. Band (1843), S. 83. _Cf_. S. 122.]

All knowledge comes from experience, from sensation, from perception.
That is true. But the question arises, does _objective reality_ “belong
to perception,” i.e., is it the source of perception? If you answer yes,
you are a materialist. If you answer no, you are inconsistent and will
inevitably arrive at subjectivism, or agnosticism, irrespective   of
whether you deny the knowability of the thing-in-itself, or the
objectivity of time, space and causality (with Kant), or whether you do
not even permit the thought of a thing-in-itself (with Hume). The
inconsistency of your empiricism, of your philosophy of experience, will
in that case lie in the fact that you deny the objective content of
experience, the objective truth of experimental knowledge.

Those who hold to the line of Kant or Hume (Mach and Avenarius are among
the latter, in so far as they are not pure Berkeleians) call us, the
materialists, “metaphysicians” because we recognise objective reality
which is given us in experience, because we recognise an objective
source of our sensations independent of man. We materialists follow
Engels in calling the Kantians and Humeans _agnostics,_ because they
deny objective reality as the source of our sensations. Agnostic is a
Greek word: _a_ in Greek means “no,” _gnosis_ “knowledge.” The agnostic
says: _I do not know_ if there is an objective reality which is
reflected, imaged by our sensations; I declare there is no way of
knowing this (see the words of Engels above quoted setting forth the
position of the agnostic). Hence the denial of objective truth by the
agnostic, and the tolerance—the philistine, cowardly tolerance—of the
dogmas regarding sprites, hobgoblins, Catholic saints, and the like.
Mach and Avenarius, pretentiously resorting to a “new” terminology, a
supposedly “new” point of view, repeat, in fact, although in a confused
and muddled way, the reply of the agnostic: on the one hand, bodies are
complexes of sensations (pure subjectivism, pure Berkeleianism); on the
other hand, if we re-christen our sensations “elements,” we may think of
them as existing independently of our sense-organs!

The Machians love to declaim that they are philosophers who completely
trust the evidence of our sense-organs, who regard the world as actually
being what it seems to us to be, full of sounds, colours, etc., whereas
to the materialists, they say, the world is dead, devoid of sound and
colour, and in its reality different from what it seems to be, and so
forth. Such declamations, for example, are indulged in by J. Petzoldt,
both in his _Introduction to the Philosophy of Pure Experience and in
his World Problem from the Positivist   Standpoint_ (1906). Petzoldt is
parroted by Mr. Victor Chernov, who waxes enthusiastic over the “new”
idea. But, in fact, the Machians are subjectivists and agnostics, for
they do not _sufficiently_ trust the evidence of our sense-organs and
are inconsistent in their sensationalism. They do not recognise
objective reality, independent of man, as the source of our sensations.
They do not regard sensations as a true copy of this objective reality,
thereby directly conflicting with natural science and throwing the door
open for fideism. On the contrary, for the materialist the world is
richer, livelier, more varied than it actually seems, for with each step
in the development of science new aspects are discovered. For the
materialist, sensations are images of the sole and ultimate objective
reality, ultimate not in the sense that it has already been explored to
the end, but in the sense that there is not and cannot be any other.
This view irrevocably closes the door not only to every species of
fideism, but also to that professorial scholasticism which, while not
recognising an objective reality as the source of our sensations,
“deduces” the concept of the objective by means of such artificial
verbal constructions as universal significance, socially-organised, and
so on and so forth, and which is unable, and frequently unwilling, to
separate objective truth from belief in sprites and hobgoblins.

The Machians contemptuously shrug their shoulders at the “antiquated”
views of the “dogmatists,” the materialists, who still cling to the
concept _matter,_ which supposedly has been refuted by “recent science”
and “recent positivism.” We shall speak separately of the new theories
of physics on the structure of matter. But it is absolutely unpardonable
to confound, as the Machians do, any particular theory of the structure
of matter with the epistemological category, to confound the problem of
the new properties of new aspects of matter (electrons, for example)
with the old problem of the theory of knowledge, with the problem of the
sources of our knowledge, the existence of objective truth, etc. We are
told that Mach “discovered the world-elements”: red, green, hard, soft,
loud, long, etc. We ask, is a man given objective reality when he sees
something red or feels something hard, etc., or   not? This hoary
philosophical query is confused by Mach. If you hold that it is not
given, you, together with Mach, inevitably sink to subjectivism and
agnosticism and deservedly fall into the embrace of the immanentists,
i.e., the philosophical Menshikovs. If you hold that it is given, a
philosophical concept is needed for this objective reality, and this
concept has been worked out long, long ago. This concept is _matter_.
Matter is a philosophical category denoting the objective reality which
is given to mall by his sensations, and which is copied, photographed
and reflected by our sensations, while existing independently of them.
Therefore, to say that such a concept can become “antiquated” is
_childish talk,_ a senseless repetition of the arguments of fashionable
_reactionary_ philosophy. Could the struggle between materialism and
idealism, the struggle between the tendencies or lines of Plato and
Democritus in philosophy, the struggle between religion and science, the
denial of objective truth and its assertion, the struggle between the
adherents of supersensible knowledge and its adversaries have become
antiquated during the two thousand years of the development of
philosophy?

Acceptance or rejection of the concept matter is a question of the
confidence man places in the evidence of his sense-organs, a question of
the source of our knowledge, a question which has been asked and debated
from the very inception of philosophy, which may be disguised in a
thousand different garbs by professorial clowns, but which can no more
become antiquated than the question whether the source of human
knowledge is sight and touch, healing and smell. To regard our
sensations as images of the external world, to recognise objective
truth, to hold the materialist theory of knowledge—these are all one and
the same thing. To illustrate this, I shall only quote from Feuerbach
and from two textbooks of philosophy, in order that the reader may judge
how elementary this question is.

“How banal,” wrote Feuerbach, “to deny that sensation is the evangel,
the gospel _(Verkündung)_ of an objective saviour.”[Feuerbach,
_Sämtliche Werke,_ X. Band, 1866, S. 194-95.] A strange, a preposterous
terminology, as you see, but a perfectly clear philosophical line:
sensation reveals   objective truth to man. “My sensation is subjective,
but its foundation [or ground—_Grund]_ is objective” (S. 195). Compare
this with the quotation given above where Feuerbach says that
materialism starts from the perceptual world as an ultimate
_(ausgemachte)_ objective truth.

Sensationalism, we read in Franck’s dictionary of
philosophy,[_Dictionnaire des sciences philosophiques [Dictionary of the
Philosophical Sciences],_ Paris, 1875.] is a doctrine which deduces all
our ideas “from the experience of sense-organs, reducing all knowledge
to sensations.” There is subjective sensationalism (scepticism and
Berkeleianism), moral sensationalism (Epicureanism),^([2]) and objective
sensationalism. “Objective sensationalism is nothing but materialism,
for matter or bodies are, in the opinion of the materialists, the only
objects that can affect our senses _(atteindre nos sens)_.”

“If sensationalism,” says Schwegler in his history of philosophy,[Dr.
Albert Schwegler, _Geschichte der Philosophie im Umriss [Outline History
of Philosophy],_ 15-te Aufl., S. 194.] “asserted that truth or being can
be apprehended exclusively by means of the senses, one had only
[Schwegler is speaking of philosophy at the end of the eighteenth
century in France] to formulate this proposition objectively and one had
the thesis of materialism: only the perceptual exists; there is no other
being save material being.”

These elementary truths, which have managed to find their way even into
the textbooks, have been forgotten by our Machians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] See F. Engels, _Luduwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German
Philosophy_ (K. Marx and F. Engels, _Selected Works,_ Volume II, Moscow,
1958, p. 371).

[2] _Scepticism_—a philosophical trend that casts doubt on the
possibility of knowing objective reality. It arose in ancient Greece as
early as the 4th to 3rd centuries B. C. (Pyrrho, Aenesidemus, Sextus
Empiricus). The adherents of ancient scepticism drew agnostic
conclusions from the premises of sensationalism, Making the subjectivity
of sensation into an absolute, the sceptics insisted on the need to
refrain from any definite judgments about things. They considered that
,man cannot go beyond his sensations and determine their truth.

During the period of the Renaissance, the French philosophers Michel
Montaigne, Pierre Charron and Pierre Bayle made use of scepticism for
combating medieval scholasticism and the Church.

In the eighteenth century scepticism was revived in the agnosticism of
I-fume an(l Kant, and an attempt to modernise ancient scepticism was
made by Gottlieb Schulze (Aenesideinus). The arguments of scepticism
were used by the Machists, neo-Kantians and other idealist philosophical
schools from the middle of the nineteenth to the beginning of the
twentieth century.

_Epicureanism_ the doctrine of the ancient Greek philosopher Epicurus of
the 4th to 3rd centuries B. C. and his successors. The aim of
philosophy, according to this doctrine, was man’s happiness; freeing him
from suffering and enabling him to attain a state of bliss. It taught
that philosophy was called upon to over come obstacles to happiness: the
fear of death due to ignorance of the laws of nature and giving rise
therefore to belief in super natural, divine forces.

As regards the theory of knowledge, Epicurus was a sensationalist. He
supposed that very subtle images proceed from things and penetrate the
human soul through the sense-organs. Conceptions of things are formed on
the basis of the sensuous perceptions of the soul, in which memory
preserves only the general features of images. Epicurus regarded
sense-perceptions themselves as the criterion of truth, and he
considered that the source of errors lay in the accidental character of
individual sensations or in the over-hasty formation of judgments.

The idealists, who distorted the teaching of this great materialist of
ancient Greece, made more attacks on Epicureanism than on the other
philosophical theories of antiquity.

In the definition of sensationalism quoted by Lenin, Franck rightly
regards Epicureanism as a variety of it, but he draws an incorrect
distinction between Epicureanism and objective materialist
sensationalism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 5. ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE TRUTH, OR THE ECLECTICISM OF ENGELS AS DISCOVERED BY A. BOGDANOV


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Two: The Theory of Knowledge of Empirio-Criticism and of Dialectical Materialism. II )

5. Absolute and Relative Truth, or the Eclecticism of Engels as Discovered by A. Bogdanov

Bogdanov made his discovery in 1906, in the preface to Book III of his
_Empirio-Monism_. “Engels in _Anti-Dühring,_” writes Bogdanov,
“expresses himself almost in the same sense in which I have just
described the relativity of truth” (p. v)—that is, in the sense of
denying all eternal truth, “denying the unconditional objectivity of all
truth whatsoever.” “Engels is wrong in his indecision, in the fact that
in spite of his irony he recognises certain ‘eternal truths,’ wretched
though they may be. . .” (p. viii). “Only inconsistency   can here
permit such eclectic reservations as those of Engels. . .” (p. ix). Let
us cite one instance of Bogdanov’s refutation of Engels’ eclecticism.
“Napoleon died on May 5, 1821,” says Engels in _Anti-Dühring,_ in the
chapter “Eternal Truths,” where he reminds Dühring of the “platitudes”
_(Plattheiten)_ to which he who claims to discover eternal truths in the
historical sciences has to confine himself. Bogdanov thus answers
Engels: “What sort of ‘truth’ is that? And what is there ‘eternal’ about
it? The recording of a single correlation, which perhaps even has no
longer any real significance for our generation, cannot serve as a basis
for any activity, and leads nowhere” (p. ix). And on page viii: “Can
_Plattheiten_ be called _Wahrheiten_? Are ‘platitudes’ truths? Truth is
a vital organising form of experience; it leads us somewhere in our
activity and provides a point of support in the struggle of life.”

It is quite clear from these two quotations that Bogdanov, instead of
refuting Engels, makes a mere _declamation_. If you cannot assert that
the proposition “Napoleon died on May 5, 1821,” is false or inexact, you
acknowledge that it is true. If you do not assert that it may be refuted
in the future, you acknowledge this truth to be eternal. But to call
phrases such as truth is a “vital organising form of experience” an
answer, is to palm off a mere _jumble of words_ as philosophy. Did the
earth have the history which is expounded in geology, or was the earth
created in seven days? Is one to be allowed to dodge this question by Is
one to be allowed to dodge this question by talking about “vital” (’what
does that mean?) truth which “leads” somewhere, and the like? Can it be
that knowledge of the history of the earth and of the history of
humanity “has no real significance”? This is just turgid nonsense, used
by Bogdanov to cover his re treat. For it is a retreat, when, having
taken it upon himself to prove that the admission of eternal truths by
Engels is eclecticism, he dodges the issue by a mere noise and clash of
words and leaves unrefuted the fact that Napoleon did die on May 5,
1821, and that to regard this truth as refutable in the future is
absurd.

The example given by Engels is elementary, and anybody without the
slightest difficulty can think of scores of similar truths that are
eternal and absolute and that only insane people can doubt (as Engels
says, citing another example:   “Paris is in France”). Why does Engels
speak here of “platitudes”? Because he refutes and ridicules the
dogmatic, metaphysical materialist Dühring, who was incapable of
applying dialectics to the relation between absolute and relative truth.
To be a materialist is to acknowledge objective truth, which is revealed
to us by our sense-organs. To acknowledge objective truth, i.e., truth
not dependent upon man and mankind, is, in one Way or another, to
recognise absolute truth. And it is this “one way or another” which
distinguishes the metaphysical materialist Dühring from the dialectical
materialist Engels. On the most complex questions of science in general,
and of historical science in particular, Dühring scattered words right
and left: ultimate, final and eternal truth. Engels jeered at him. Of
course there are eternal truths, Engels said, but it is unwise to use
high-sounding words _(gewaltige Worte)_ in connection with simple
things. If we want to advance materialism, we must drop this trite play
with the words “eternal truth”; we must learn to put, and answer, the
question of the relation between absolute and relative truth
dialectically. It was on this issue that the fight between Dühring and
Engels was waged thirty years ago. And Bogdanov, who managed “_not to
notice_” Engels’ explanation of the problem of absolute and relative
truth given _in this very same chapter,_ and who managed to accuse
Engels of “eclecticism” for his admission of a proposition which is a
truism for _all_ forms of materialism, only once again betrays his utter
ignorance of both materialism and dialectics.

“Now we come to the question,” Engels writes in Anti-Dühring, in the
beginning of the chapter mentioned (Part I, Chap. IX), “whether any, and
if so which, products of human knowledge ever can have sovereign
validity and an unconditional claim _(Anspruch)_ to truth” (5th German
ed., p. 79). And Engels answers the question thus:

“The sovereignty of thought is realised in a number of extremely
unsovereignly-thinking human beings; the knowledge which has an
unconditional claim to truth is realised in a number of relative errors;
neither the one nor the other [i.e., neither absolutely true knowledge,
nor sovereign thought] can be fully realised except through an endless
eternity of human existence.

“Here once again we find the same contradiction as we found above,
between the character of human thought, necessarily conceived as
absolute, and its reality in individual human beings with their
extremely limited thought. This is a contradiction which can only be
solved in the infinite progression, or what is for us, at least from a
practical standpoint, the endless succession, of generations of mankind.
In this sense human thought is just as much sovereign as not sovereign,
and its capacity for knowledge just as much un limited as limited. It is
sovereign and unlimited in its disposition _(Anlage),_ its vocation, its
possibilities and its historical ultimate goal; it is not sovereign and
it is limited in its individual expression and in its realisation at
each particular moment” (p. 81).[_Cf_. V. Chernov, _loc_. _cit_., p. 64,
_et seq_. Chernov, the Machian, fully shares the position of Bogdanov
who does not wish to own himself a Machian. The difference is that
Bogdanov tries to _cover up_ his disagreement with Engels, to present it
as a casual matter, etc., while Chernov feels that it is a question of a
struggle against both materialism and dialectics.]

“It is just the same,” Engels continues, “with eternal truths.”^([1])

This argument is extremely important for the question of _relativism,_
i.e., the principle of the relativity of our knowledge, which is
stressed by all Machians. The Machians _one and all_ insist that they
are relativists, but the Russian Machians, while repeating the words of
the Germans, are afraid, or unable to propound the question of the
relation of relativism to dialectics clearly and straightforwardly. For
Bogdanov (as for all the Machians) recognition of the relativity of our
knowledge _excludes_ even the least admission of absolute truth. For
Engels absolute truth is compounded from relative truths. Bogdanov is a
relativist; Engels is a dialectician. Here is another, no less
important, argument of Engels from the chapter of _Anti-Dühring_ already
quoted:

“Truth and error, like all thought-concepts which move in polar
opposites, have absolute validity only in an extremely limited field, as
we have just seen, and as even Herr Dühring would realise if he had any
acquaintance with the first elements of dialectics, which deal precisely
with the inadequacy of all polar opposites. As soon as we apply   the
antithesis between truth and error outside of that narrow field which
has been referred to above it becomes relative and therefore
unserviceable for exact scientific modes of expression; and if we
attempt to apply it as absolutely valid outside that field we really
find ourselves altogether beaten: both poles of the antithesis become
transformed into their opposites, truth becomes error and error truth”
(p. 86).[2] Here follows the example of Boyle’s law (the volume of a gas
is inversely proportional to its pressure). The “grain of truth”
contained in this law is only absolute truth within certain limits. The
law, it appears, is a truth “only approximately.”

Human thought then by its nature is capable of giving, and does give,
absolute truth, which is compounded of a sum-total of relative truths.
Each step in the development of science adds new grains to the sum of
absolute truth, but the limits of the truth of each scientific
proposition are relative, now expanding, now shrinking with the growth
of knowledge. “Absolute truth,” says J. Dietzgen in his _Excursions,_—
“can be seen, heard, smelt, touched and, of course, also be _known,_ but
it is not entirely absorbed _(geht nicht auf)_ into knowledge” (p. 195).
“It goes without saying that a picture does not exhaust its object and
the artist remains behind his model. . . . How can a picture ‘coincide’
with its model? Approximately it can” (p. 197). “Hence, we can know
nature and her parts only relatively; since even a part, though only a
relation of nature, possesses nevertheless the nature of the absolute,
the nature of nature as a whole _(des Naturganzen an sich)_ which cannot
be exhausted by knowledge. . . . How, then, do we know that behind the
phenomena of nature, behind the relative truths, there is a universal,
unlimited, absolute nature which does not reveal itself to man
completely? . . . Whence this knowledge? It is innate; it is given us
with consciousness” (p. 198). This last statement is one of the
inexactitudes of Dietzgen’s which led Marx, in one of his letters to
Kugelmann, to speak of the confusion in Dietzgen’s views.^([3]) Only by
seizing upon such incorrect passages can one speak of a specific
philosophy of Dietzgen differing from dialectical materialism. But
Dietzgen corrects himself _on the same page_ : “When I say that the
consciousness of eternal, absolute truth is innate in us,   that it is
the one and only _a priori_ knowledge, experience also confirms this
innate consciousness” (p. 198).

From all these statements by Engels and Dietzgen it is obvious that for
dialectical materialism there is no impassable boundary between relative
and absolute truth. Bogdanov entirely failed to grasp this if he could
write: “It [the world outlook of the old materialism] sets itself up as
the absolute _objective knowledge of the essence of things_ [Bogdanov’s
italics] and is incompatible with the historically conditional nature of
all ideologies” _(Empirio-Monism,_ Bk. III, p. iv). From the standpoint
of modern materialism i.e., Marxism, the _limits_ of approximation of
our knowledge to objective, absolute truth are historically conditional,
but the existence of such truth is _unconditional,_ and the fact that we
are approaching nearer to it is also unconditional. The contours of the
picture are historically conditional, but the fact that this picture
depicts an objectively existing model is unconditional. When and under
what circumstances we reached, in our knowledge of the essential nature
of things, the discovery of alizarin in coal tar or the discovery of
electrons in the atom is historically conditional; but that every such
discovery is an advance of “absolutely objective knowledge” is
unconditional. In a word, every ideology is historically conditional,
but it is unconditionally true that to every scientific ideology (as
distinct, for instance, from religious ideology), there corresponds an
objective truth, absolute nature. You will say that this distinction
between relative and absolute truth is indefinite. And I shall reply:
yes, it is sufficiently “indefinite” to prevent science from becoming a
dogma in the bad sense of the term, from becoming something dead,
frozen, ossified; but it is at the same time sufficiently “definite” to
enable us to dissociate ourselves in the most emphatic and irrevocable
manner from fideism and agnosticism, from philosophical idealism and the
sophistry of the followers of Hume and Kant. Here is a boundary which
you have not noticed, and not having noticed it, you have fallen into
the swamp of reactionary philosophy. It is the boundary between
dialectical materialism and relativism.

We are relativists, proclaim Mach, Avenarius, Petzoldt. We are
relativists, echo Mr. Chernov and certain Russian   Machians, would-be
Marxists. Yes, Mr. Chernov and Comrades Machians—and therein lies your
error. For to make relativism the basis of the theory of knowledge is
inevitably to condemn oneself either to absolute scepticism, agnosticism
and sophistry, or to subjectivism. Relativism as a basis of the theory
of knowledge is not only the recognition of the relativity of our
knowledge, but also a denial of any objective measure or model existing
independently of humanity to which our relative knowledge approximates.
From the standpoint of naked relativism one can justify any sophistry;
one may regard it as “conditional” whether Napoleon died on May 5, 1821,
or not; one may declare the admission, alongside of scientific ideology
(“convenient” in one respect), of religious ideology (very “convenient”
in another respect) a mere “convenience” for man or humanity, and so
forth.

Dialectics—as Hegel in his time explained—_contains_ the element of
relativism, of negation, of scepticism, but _is not reducible_ to
relativism. The materialist dialectics of Marx and Engels certainly does
contain relativism, but is not reducible to relativism, that is, it
recognises the relativity of all our knowledge, not in the sense of
denying objective truth, but in the sense that the limits of
approximation of our knowledge to this truth are historically
conditional.

Bogdanov writes in italics: “_Consistent Marxism does not admit such
dogmatism and such static concepts_” as eternal truths.
_(Empirio-Monism,_ Bk. III, p. ix.) This is a muddle. If the world is
eternally moving and developing matter (as the Marxists think),
reflected by the developing human consciousness, what is there “static”
here? The point at issue is not the immutable essence of things, or an
immutable consciousness, but the _correspondence_ between the
consciousness which reflects nature and the nature which is reflected by
consciousness. In connection with this question, and this question
alone, the term “dogmatism” has a specific, characteristic philosophical
flavour: it is a favourite word used by the idealists and the agnostics
_against_ the materialists, as we have already seen in the case of the
fairly “old” materialist, Feuerbach. The objections brought against
materialism from the standpoint of the celebrated “recent positivism”
are just ancient trash.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] See F. Engels, _Anti-Dühring_ , Moscow, 1959, pp. 120-22.

[2] See F. Engels, _Anti-Dühring_ , Moscow, 1959, p. 127. p. 135

[3] See the letter of K. Marx to L. Kugelmann of December 5, 1868 (K.
Marx, _Briefe en Kugelraenn,_ Inoizdat, 1940).

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 6. THE CRITERION OF PRACTICE IN THE THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Two: The Theory of Knowledge of Empirio-Criticism and of Dialectical Materialism. II )

6. The Criterion of Practice in the Theory of Knowledge

We have seen that Marx in 1845 and Engels in 1888 and 1892 placed the
criterion of practice at the basis of the materialist theory of
knowledge.^([1]) “The dispute over the reality or non-reality of
thinking which is isolated from practice is a purely scholastic
question,” says Marx in his second Thesis on Feuerbach. The best
refutation of Kantian and Humean agnosticism as well as of other
philosophical crotchets _(Schrullen)_ is practice, repeats Engels. “The
result of our action proves the conformity _(Uebereinstimmung)_ of our
perceptions with the objective nature of the things perceived,” he says
in reply to the agnostics.^([2])

Compare this with Mach’s argument about the criterion of practice: “In
the common way of thinking and speaking _appearance,_ _illusion,_ is
usually contrasted with _reality_. A pencil held in front of us in the
air is seen as straight; when we dip it slantwise into water we see it
as crooked. In the latter case we say that the pencil _appears crooked
but in reality_ it is straight. But what entitles us to declare _one_
fact to be the reality, and to degrade _the other_ to an appearance?. .
. Our expectation is deceived when we fall into the natural error of
expecting what we are accustomed to although the case is unusual. The
facts are not to blame for that. In these cases, to speak of
_appearance_ may have a practical significance, but not a scientific
significance. Similarly, the question which is often asked, whether the
world is real or whether we merely dream it, is devoid of all scientific
significance. Even the wildest dream is a fact as much as any other”
_(Analysis of Sensations,_ pp. 18-19).

It is true that not only is the wildest dream a fact, but also the
wildest philosophy. No doubt of this is possible after an acquaintance
with the philosophy of Ernst Mach. Egregious sophist that he is, he
confounds the scientific-historical and psychological investigation of
human errors, of every “wild dream” of humanity, such as belief in
sprites, hobgoblins, and so forth, with the epistemological distinction
between truth and “wildness.” It is as if an economist were to say that
both Senior’s theory that the whole profit   of the capitalist is
obtained from the “last hour” of the worker’s labour and Marx’s theory
are both facts, and that from the standpoint of science there is no
point in asking which theory expresses objective truth and which—the
prejudice of the bourgeoisie and the venality of its professors. The
tanner Joseph Dietzgen regarded the scientific, i.e., the materialist,
theory of knowledge as a “universal weapon against religious belief”
_(Kleinere philosophische Schriften [Smaller Philosophical Essays],_ S.
55), but for the professor-in-ordinary Ernst Mach the distinction
between the materialist and the subjective-idealist theories of
knowledge “is devoid of all scientific significance”! That science is
non partisan in the struggle of materialism against idealism and
religion is a favourite idea not only of Mach but of all modern
bourgeois professors, who are, as Dietzgen justly expresses it,
“graduated flunkeys who stupefy the people by their twisted idealism”
(op. cit., p. 53

And a twisted professorial idealism it is, indeed, when the criterion of
practice, which for every one of us distinguishes illusion from reality,
is removed by Mach from the realm of science, from the realm of the
theory of knowledge. Human practice proves the correctness of the
materialist theory of knowledge, said Marx and Engels, who dubbed all
attempts to solve the fundamental question of epistemology without the
aid of practice “scholastic” and “philosophical crotchets.” But for Mach
practice is one thing and the theory of knowledge another. They can be
placed side by side without making the latter conditional on the former.
In his last work, _Knowledge and Error,_ Mach says: “Knowledge is a
biologically useful _(förderndes)_ mental experience” (2nd Germ. ed., p.
115). “Only success can separate knowledge from error” (p. 116). “The
concept is a physical working hypothesis” (p. 143). In their astonishing
naïveté our Russian Machian would-be Marxists regard such phrases of
Mach’s as proof that he _comes close_ to Marxism. But Mach here comes
just as close to Marxism as Bismarck to the labour movement, or Bishop
Eulogius^([3]) to democracy. With Mach such propositions _stand side by
side_ with his idealist theory of knowledge and do not determine the
choice of one or another definite line of epistemology. Knowledge can be
useful biologically, useful in human practice, useful for the
preservation of   life, for the preservation of the species, only when
it reflects objective truth, truth which is independent of man. For the
materialist the “success” of human practice proves the correspondence
between our ideas and the objective nature of the things we perceive.
For the solipsist “success” is everything needed _by me in practice,_
which can be regarded separately from the theory of knowledge. If we
include the criterion of practice in the foundation of the theory of
knowledge we inevitably arrive at materialism, says the Marxist. Let
practice be materialist, says Mach, but theory is another matter.

"In practice," Mach writes in the _Analysis of Sensations_, "we can as
little do without the idea of the _self_ when we perform any act, as we
can do without the idea of a body when we grasp at a thing.
Physiologically we remain egoists and materialists with the same
constancy as we forever see the sun rising again. But theoretically this
view cannot be adhered to" (284-85).

Egoism is beside the point here, for egoism is not an epistemological
cateogry. The question of the appartent movement of the sun around the
earth is also beside the point, for in practice, which serves us as a
criterion in the theory of knowledge, we must include also the practice
of astronomical observations, discovereies, etc. There remains only
Mach’s valuable admission that in their practical life men are entirely
and exclusively guided by the materialist theory of knowledge; the
attempt to obviate it "theoretically" is characteristic of Mach’s
_gelehrte_ scholastic and twisted idealistic endeavours.

How little of a novelty are these efforts to eliminate practice–as
something unsusceptible to epistemological treatment–in order to make
room for agnosticism and idealism is show by the following example from
the history of German classical philosophy. Between Kan and Fichte
stands G. E. Schulze (known in the history of philosophy as
Schulze-Aenesidemus). He openly advocates the skeptical trend in
philosophy and calls himself a follower of Hume) and of the ancients
Pyrrho and Sextus). He emphatically rejects every thing-in-itself and
the possibility of objective knowledge, and emphatically insists that we
should not go beyond “experience,” beyond sensations, in which
connection   he anticipates the following objection from the other camp:
“Since the sceptic when he takes part in the affairs of life assumes as
indubitable the reality of objective things, behaves accordingly, and
thus admits a criterion of truth, his own behaviour is the best and
clearest refutation of his scepticism.”—[G. E. Schulze, _Aenesidemus
oder über die Fundemente der von dem Herrn Professor Reinhold in Jena
gelieferten Elementarphilosophie [Aenesidemus,_ _or the Fundamentals of
the Elementary Philosophy Propounded by Professor Reinhold in Jena],_
1792, S. 253.] “Such proofs,” Schulze indignantly retorts, “are only
valid for the mob _(Pöbel)_.” For “my scepticism does not concern the
requirements of practical life, but remains within the bounds of
philosophy” (pp. 254, 255).

In similar manner, the subjective idealist Fichte also hopes to find
room within the bounds of idealistic philosophy for that “realism which
is inevitable _(sich aufdringt)_ for all of us, and even for the most
determined idealist, when it comes to action, i.e., the assumption that
objects exist quite independently of us and outside us” _(Werke,_ I,
455).

Mach’s recent positivism has not traveled far from Schulze and Fichte!
Let us note as a curiosity that on this question too for Bazarov there
is no one but Plekhanov—there is no beast stronger than the cat. Bazarov
ridicules the “_salto_ vitale philosophy of Plekhanov” _(Studies,_ etc.,
p. 69), who indeed made the absurd remark that “belief” in the existence
of the outer world “is an inevitable _salto vitale_” (vital leap) of
philosophy _(Notes on Ludwig Feuerbach,_ p. III). The word “belief”
(taken from Hume), although put in quotation marks, discloses a
confusion of terms on Plekhanov’s part. There can be no question about
that. But what has Plekhanov got to do with it? Why did not Bazarov take
some other materialist, Feuerbach, for instance? Is it only because he
does not know him? But ignorance is no argument. Feuerbach also, like
Marx and Engels, makes an impermissible—from the point of view of
Schulze, Fichte and Mach—“leap” to practice in the fundamental problems
of epistemology. Criticising idealism, Feuerbach explains its essential
nature by the following striking quotation from Fichte, which superbly
demolishes Machism: “‘Youassume,’ writes Fichte, ‘that things are real,
that they exist outside   of you, only because you see them, hear them
and touch them. But vision, touch and hearing are only sensations. . . .
You perceive, not the objects, but only your sensations’” (Feuerbach,
_Werke,_ X. Band, S. 185). To which Feuerbach replies that a human being
is not an abstract ego, but either a man or woman, and the question
whether the world is sensation can be compared to the question: is the
man or woman my sensation, or do our relations in practical life prove
the contrary? “This is the, fundamental defect of idealism: it asks and
answers the question of objectivity and subjectivity, of the reality or
unreality of the world, only from the standpoint of theory” _(ibid_., p.
189). Feuerbach makes the sum-total of human practice the basis of the
theory of knowledge. He says that idealists of course also recognise the
reality of the _I_ and the _Thou_ in practical life. For the idealists
“this point of view is valid only for practical life and not for
speculation. But a speculation which contradicts life, which makes the
standpoint of death, of a soul separated from the body, the standpoint
of truth, is a dead and false speculation” (p. 192). Before we
_perceive,_ we breathe; we cannot exist without air, food and drink.

“Does this mean that we must deal with questions of food and drink when
examining the problem of the ideality or reality of the world?—exclaims
the indignant idealist. How vile! What an offence against good manners
soundly to berate materialism in the scientific sense from the chair of
philosophy and the pulpit of theology, only to practise materialism with
all one’s heart and soul in the crudest form at the table d’h(tm)te” (p.
195). And Feuerbach exclaims that to identify subjective sensation with
the objective world “is to identify pollution with procreation” (p.
198).

A comment not of the politest order, but it hits the vital spot of those
philosophers who teach that sense-perception is the reality existing
outside us.

The standpoint of life, of practice, should be first and fundamental in
the theory of knowledge. And it inevitably leads to materialism,
brushing aside the endless fabrications of professorial scholasticism.
Of course, we must not forget that the criterion of practice can never,
in the nature of things, either confirm or refute any human idea
_completely_. This criterion also is sufficiently “indefinite”   not to
allow human knowledge to become “absolute,” but at the same time it is
sufficiently definite to wage a ruthless fight on all varieties of
idealism and agnosticism. If what our practice confirms is the sole,
ultimate and objective truth, then from this must follow the recognition
that the only path to this truth is the path of science, which holds the
materialist point of view. For instance, Bogdanov is prepared to
recognise Marx’s theory of the circulation of money as an objective
truth only for “our time,” and calls it “dogmatism” to at tribute to
this theory a “super-historically objective” truth _(Empirio-Monism,_
Bk. III, p. vii). This is again a muddle. The correspondence of this
theory to practice cannot be altered by any future circumstances, for
the same simple reason that makes it an _eternal_ truth that Napoleon
died on May 5, 1821. But inasmuch as the criterion of practice, i.e.,
the course of development of _all_ capitalist countries in the last few
decades, proves only the objective truth of Marx’s _whole_ social and
economic theory in general, and not merely of one or other of its parts,
formulations, etc., it is clear that to talk of the “dogmatism” of the
Marxists is to make an unpardonable concession to bourgeois economics.
The sole conclusion to be drawn from the opinion of the Marxists that
Marx’s theory is an objective truth is that by following the _path_ of
Marxist theory we shall draw closer and closer to objective truth
(without ever exhausting it); but by following _any other path_ we shall
arrive at nothing but confusion and lies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

Notes

[1] Lenin is referring to Marx’s “Theses on Feuerbach” (1845) and to the
works by F. Engels: _Ludwig Feuerbach end the End of Classical German
Philosophy_ (1388) and the “Special Introduction to the English Edition
of 1892” of his _Socielism: Utopian and Scientific_ (see K. Marx and F.
Bagels, _Selected Works,_ Vol. II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 403-05, 358-403,
93-115).

[2] See K. Marx and F. Engels, _Selected Works,_ Vol. II, Moscow, 1958,
pp. 403, 101.

[3] _Bishop Eulogius_ member of the State Duma, a monarchist and extreme
reactionary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 1. WHAT IS MATTER? WHAT IS EXPERIENCE?


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

Chapter Three: The Theory of Knowledge of Dialectical Materialism and of Empirio-Criticism. III

1. What Is Matter? What Is Experience?

The first of these questions is constantly being hurled by the idealists
and agnostics, including the Machians, at the materialists; the second
question by the materialists at the Machians. Let us try to make the
point at issue clear.

Avenarius says on the subject of matter:

“Within the purified, ‘complete experience’ there is nothing
‘physical’—‘matter’ in the metaphysical absolute conception—for ‘matter’
according to this conception is only an abstraction; it would be the
total of the counter-terms abstracted from every central term. Just as
in the principal co-ordination, that is, ‘complete experience,’ a
counter-term is inconceivable (_undenkbar_) without a central term, so
‘matter’ in the metaphysical absolute conception is a complete chimera
(_Unding_)” (_Bemerkungen_ [_Notes_], S. 2, in the journal cited, §
119).

In all this gibberish one thing is evident, namely, that Avenarius
designates the physical or matter by the terms absolute and metaphysics,
for, according to his theory of the principal co-ordination (or, in the
new way, “complete expcrience"), the counter-term is inseparable from
the central term, the environment from the _self_; the _non-self_ is
inseparable from the _self_ (as J. G. Fichte said). That this theory is
disguised subjective idealism we have already shown, and the nature of
Avenarius’ attacks on “matter” is quite obvious: the idealist denies
physical being that is independent of the   mind and therefore rejects
the concept elaborated by philosophy for such being. That matter is
“physical” (_i.e._., that which is most familiar and immediately given
to man, and the existence of which no one save an inmate of a lunatic
asylum can doubt) is not denied by Avenarius; he only insists on the
acceptance of “_his_” theory of the indissoluble connection between the
environment and the _self_.

Mach expresses the same thought more simply, without philosophical
flourishes: “What we call matter is a certain systematic combination of
the _elements_ (sensations)” (_Analysis of Sensations_, p. 265). Mach
thinks that by this assertion he is effecting a “radical change” in the
usual world outlook. In reality this is the old, old subjective
idealism, the nakedness of which is concealed by the word “element.”

And lastly, the English Machian, Pearson, a rabid antagonist of
materialism, says: “Now there can be no scientific objection to our
classifying certain more or less permanent groups of sense-impressions
together and terming them matter,—to do so indeed leads us very near to
John Stuart Mill’s definition of matter as a ‘permanent possibility of
sensation,’—but this definition of matter then leads us entirely away
from matter as the thing which moves” (_The Grammar of Science_, 2nd
ed., 1900, p. 249). Here there is not even the fig-leaf of the
“elements,” and the idealist openly stretches out a hand to the
agnostic.

As the reader sees, all these arguments of the founders of
empirio-criticism entirely and exclusively revolve around the old
epistemological question of the relation of thinking to being, of
sensation to the physical. It required the extreme naïveté of the
Russian Machians to discern anything here that is even remotely related
to “recent science,” or “recent positivism.” All the philosophers
mentioned by us, some frankly, others guardedly, replace the fundamental
philosophical line of materialism (from being to thinking, from matter
to sensation) by the reverse line of idealism. Their denial of matter is
the old answer to epistemological problems, which consists in denying
the existence of an external, objective source of our sensations, of an
objective reality corresponding to our sensations. On the other hand,
the recognition of the philosophical line denied by the idealists and
agnostics is expressed in the definitions:   matter is that which,
acting upon our sense-organs, produces sensation; matter is the
objective reality given to us in sensation, and so forth.

Bogdanov, pretending to argue only against Beltov and cravenly ignoring
Engels, is indignant at such definitions, which, don’t you see, “prove
to be simple repetitions” (_Empirio-Monism_, Bk. III, p. xvi) of the
“formula” (_of Engels_, our “Marxist” forgets to add) that for one trend
in philosophy matter is primary and spirit secondary, while for the
other trend the reverse is the case. All the Russian Machians exultantly
echo Bogdanov’s “refutation"! But the slightest reflection could have
shown these people that it is impossible, in the very nature of the
case, to give any definition of these two ultimate concepts of
epistemology save one that indicates which of them is taken as primary.
What is meant by giving a “definition"? It means essentially to bring a
given concept within a more comprehensive concept. For example, when I
give the definition “an ass is an animal,” I am bringing the concept
“ass” within a more comprehensive concept. The question then is, are
there more comprehensive concepts, with which the theory of knowledge
could operate, than those of being and thinking, matter and sensation,
physical and mental? No. These are the ultimate concepts, the most
comprehensive concepts which epistemology has in point of fact so far
not surpassed (apart from changes in _nomenclature_, which are _always_
possible). One must be a charlatan or an utter blockhead to demand a
“definition” of these two “series” of concepts of ultimate
comprehensiveness which would not be a “mere repetition": one or the
other must be taken as the primary. Take the three afore-mentioned
arguments on matter. What do they all amount to? To this, that these
philosophers proceed from the mental or the _self_, to the physical, or
environment, as from the central term to the counter-term—or from
sensation to matter, or from sense-perception to matter. Could
Avenarius, Mach and Pearson in fact have given any other “definition” of
these fundamental concepts, save by pointing to the _trend_ of their
philosophical line? Could they have defined in any other way, in any
specific way, what the _self_ is, what sensation is, what
sense-perception is? One has only to formulate the question clearly to
realise what utter non-sense   the Machians are talking when they demand
that the materialists give a definition of matter which would not amount
to a repetition of the proposition that matter, nature, being, the
physical—is primary, and spirit, consciousness, sensation, the
psychical—is secondary.

One expression of the genius of Marx and Engels was that they despised
pedantic playing with new words, erudite terms, and subtle “isms,” and
said simply and plainly: there is a materialist line and an idealist
line in philosophy, and between them there are various shades of
agnosticism. The painful quest for a “new” point of view in philosophy
betrays the same poverty of mind that is revealed in the painful effort
to create a “new” theory of value, or a “new” theory of rent, and so
forth.

Of Avenarius, his disciple Carstanjen says that he once expressed
himself in private conversation as follows: “I know neither the physical
nor the mental, but only some third.” To the remark of one writer that
the concept of this third was not given by Avenarius, Petzoldt replied:
“We know why he could not advance such a concept. The third lacks a
counter-concept (_Gegenbegriff_). . . . The question, what is the third?
is illogically put” (_Einf_. _i_._d_. _Ph_. _d_. _r_. _E_., II,
329).[_Einführung in die Philosophie der reinen Erfahrung_
[_Introduction to the Philosophy of Pure Experience_], Vol. II, p. 329.
–_Ed_] Petzoldt understands that an ultimate concept cannot be defined.
But he does not understand that the resort to a “third” is a mere
subterfuge, for every one of us knows what is physical and what is
mental, but none of us knows at present what that “third” is. Avenarius
was merely covering up his tracks by this subterfuge and _actually_ was
declaring that the _self_ is the primary (central term) and nature
(environment) the secondary (counter-term).

Of course, even the antithesis of matter and mind has absolute
significance only within the bounds of a very limited field—in this case
exclusively within the bounds of the fundamental epistemological problem
of what is to be regarded as primary and what as secondary. Beyond these
bounds the relative character of this antithesis is indubitable.

Let us now examine how the word “experience” is used in empirio-critical
philosophy. The first paragraph of _The Critique of Pure Experience_
expounds the following “assumption":   “Any part of our environment
stands in relation to human individuals in such a way that, the former
having been given, the latter speak of their experience as follows:
‘this is experienced,’ ‘this is an experience’; or ‘it followed from
experience,’ or ‘it depends upon experience.’” (Russ. trans., p. 1.)
Thus experience is defined in terms of these same concepts: _self_ and
environment; while the “doctrine” of their “indissoluble” connection is
for the time being tucked out of the way. Further: “The synthetic
concept of pure experience"—namely, experience “as a predication for
which, in all its components, only parts of the environment serve as a
premise” (pp. 1 and 2). If we assume that the environment exists
independently of “declarations” and “predications” of man, then it
becomes possible to interpret experience in a materialist way! “The
analytical concept of pure experience"—"namely, as a predication to
which noth ing is admixed that would not be in its turn experience and
which, therefore, in itself is nothing but experience” (p. 2).
Experience is experience. And there are people who take this
quasi-erudite rigmarole for true wisdom!

It is essential to add that in the second volume of _The Critique of
Pure Experience_ Avenarius regards “experience” as a “special case” of
the _mental_; that he divides experience into _sachhafte Werte_
(thing-values) and _gedankenhafte Werte_ (thought-values); that
“experience in the broad sense” includes the latter; that “complete
experience” is identified with the principal co-ordination
(_Bemerkungen_). In short, you pay your money and take your choice.
“Experience” embraces both the materialist and the idealist line in
philosophy and sanctifies the muddling of them. But while our Machians
confidingly accept “pure experience” as pure coin of the realm, in
philosophical literature the representatives of the various trends are
alike in pointing to Avenarius’ abuse of this concept. “What pure
experience is,” A. Riehl writes, “remains vague with Avenarius, and his
explanation that ‘pure experience is experience to which nothing is
admixed that is not in its turn experience’ obviously revolves in a
circle” (_Systematische Philosophie_ [_Systematic Philosopby_], Leipzig,
1907, S. 102). Pure experience for Avenarius, writes Wundt, is at times
any kind of fantasy, and at others, a predication   with the character
of “corporeality” (_Philosophische Studien_, XIII. Band, S. 92-93).
Avenarius _stretches_ the concept experience (S. 382). “On the precise
definition of the terms experience and pure experience,” writes
Cauwelaert, “depends the meaning of the whole of this philosophy.
Avenarius does not give a precise definition” (_Revue néo-scolastique_,
fevrier 1907, p. 61). “The vagueness of the term ‘experience’ stands him
in good stead, and so in the end Avenarius falls back on the timeworn
argument of subjective idealism” (under the pretence of combating it),
says Norman Smith (_Mind_, Vol. XV, p. 29).

“I openly declare that the inner sense, the soul of my philosophy
consists in this that a human being possesses nothing save experience; a
human being comes to everything to which he comes only through
experience. . . .” A zealous philosopher of pure experience, is he not?
The author of these words is the subjective idealist Fichte
(_Sonnenklarer Bericht_, _usw_., S. 12). We know from the history of
philosophy that the interpretation of the concept experience divided the
classical materialists from the idealists. Today professorial philosophy
of all shades disguises its reactionary nature by declaiming on the
subject of “experience.” All the immanentists fall back on experience.
In the preface to the second edition of his _Knowledge and Error_, Mach
praises a book by Professor Wilhelm Jerusalem in which we read: “The
acceptance of a divine original being is not contradictory to
experience” (_Der kritische Idealismus und die reine Logik_ [_Critical
Idealism and Pure Logic_], S. 222).

One can only commiserate with people who believed Avenarius and Co. that
the “obsolete” distinction between materialism and idealism can be
surmounted by the word “experience.” When Valentinov and Yushkevich
accuse Bogdanov, who departed somewhat from pure Machism, of abusing the
word experience, these gentlemen are only betraying their ignorance.
Bogdanov is “not guilty” in this case; he _only_ slavishly borrowed the
muddle of Mach and Avenarius. When Bogdanov says that “consciousness and
immediate mental experience are identical concepts” (_Empirio-Monism_,
Bk. II, p. 53) while matter is “not experience” but “the unknown which
evokes everything known” (_Empirio-Monism_, Bk. III, p. xiii), he is
interpreting experience _idealistically_.   And, of course, he is not
the first[1] nor the last to build petty idealist systems on the word
experience. When he replies to the reactionary philosophers by declaring
that attempts to transcend the boundaries of experience lead in fact
“only to empty abstractions and contradictory images, all the elements
of which have nevertheless been taken from experience” (Bk. I, p. 48),
he is drawing a contrast between the empty abstractions of the human
mind and that which exists outside of man and independently of his mind,
in other words, he is interpreting experience as a materialist.

Similarly, even Mach, although he makes idealism his starting point
(bodies are complexes of sensations or “elements") frequently strays
into a materialist interpretation of the word experience. “We must not
philosophise out of ourselves (_nicht aus uns herausphilosophieren_),
but must take from experience,” he says in the _Mechanik_ (3rd Germ.
ed., 1897, p. 14). Here a contrast is drawn between experience and
philosophising out of ourselves, in other words, experience is regarded
as something objective, something given to man from the outside; it is
interpreted materialistically. Here is another example: “What we observe
in nature is imprinted, although uncomprehended and unanalysed, upon our
ideas, which, then, in their most general and strongest (_stärksten_)
features imitate (_nachahmen_) the processes of nature. In these
experiences we possess a treasure-store (_Schatz_) which is ever to
hand. . .” (_op_. _cit_., p. 27). Here nature is taken as primary and
sensation and experience as products. Had Mach consistently adhered to
this point of view in the fundamental questions of epistemology, he
would have spared humanity many foolish idealist “complexes.” A third
example: “The close connection of thought and experience creates modern
natural science. Experience gives rise to a thought. The latter is
further elaborated and is again compared with experience” (_Erkenntnis
und Irrtum_, S. 200). Mach’s special “philosophy”   is here thrown
overboard, and the author instinctively accepts the customary standpoint
of the scientists, who regard experience materialistically.

To summarise: the word “experience,” on which the Machians build their
systems, has long been serving as a shield for idealist systems, and is
now serving Avenarius and Co. in eclectically passing to and fro between
the idealist position and the materialist position. The various
“definitions” of this concept are only expressions of those two
fundamental lines in philosophy which were so strikingly revealed by
Engels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] THIS FOOTNOTE has been moved into BODY OF DOCUMENT.

[2] _Revue de philosophic (Review of Philosophy)_—a French idealist
journal founded by E. Peillaubt, which was published in Paris from 1900
to 1939.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 2. PLEKHANOV'S ERROR CONCERNING THE CONCEPT 'EXPERIENCE'


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Three: The Theory of Knowledge of Dialectical Materialism and of Empirio-Criticism. III )

2. Plekhanov’s Error Concerning The Concept “Experience”

On pages x-xi of his introduction to _L. Feuerbach_ (1905 ed.) Plekhanov
says:

“One German writer has remarked that for empirio-criticism _experience_
is only an object of investigation, and not a means of knowledge. If
that is so, then the distinction between empirio-criticism and
materialism loses all meaning, and discussion of the question whether or
not empirio-criticism is destined to replace materialism is absolutely
shallow and idle.”

This is one complete muddle.

Fr. Carstanjen, one of the most “orthodox” followers of Avenarius, says
in his article on empirio-criticism (a reply to Wundt), that “for _The
Critique of Pure Experience_ experience is not a means of knowledge but
only an object of investigation."^([1]) It follows that according to
Plekhanov any distinction between the views of Fr. Carstanjen and
materialism is meaningless!

Fr. Carstanjen is almost literally quoting Avenarius, who in his _Notes_
emphatically contrasts his conception of experience as that which is
given us, that which we find (_das Vorgefundene_), with the conception
of experience as a “means of knowledge” in “the sense of the prevailing
theories of knowledge, which essentially are fully metaphysical” (_op_.
_cit_., p. 401). Petzoldt, following Avenarius, says the   same thing in
his _Introduction to the Philosophy of Pure Experience_ (Bd. I, S. 170).
Thus, according to Plekhanov, the distinction between the views of
Carstanjen, Avenarius, Petzoldt and materialism is meaningless! Either
Plekhanov has not read Carstanjen and Co. as thoroughly as he should, or
he has taken his reference to “a German writer” at fifth hand.

What then does this statement, uttered by some of the most prominent
empirio-criticists and not understood by Plekhanov, mean? Carstanjen
wishes to say that Avenarius in his _The Critique of Pure Experience_
takes experience, _i.e._., all “human predications,” as the _object_ of
investigation. Avenarius does not investigate here, says Carstanjen
(_op_. _cit_., p. 50), whether these predications are real, or whether
they relate, for example, to ghosts; he merely arranges, systematises,
formally classifies all possible human predications, _both idealist and
materialist_ (p. 53), without going into the essence of the question.
Carstanjen is absolutely right when he characterises _this_ point of
view as “scepticism par excellence” (p. 213). In this article, by the
way, Carstanjen defends his beloved master from the ignominious (for a
German professor) charge of materialism levelled against him by Wundt.
Why are we materialists, pray?—such is the burden of Carstanjen’s
objections—when we speak of “experience” we do not mean it in the
ordinary current sense, which leads or might lead to materialism, but in
the sense that we investigate everything that men “predicate” as
experience. Carstanjen and Avenarius regard the view that experience is
a means of knowledge as materialistic (that, perhaps, is the most common
opinion, but nevertheless, untrue, as we have seen in the case of
Fichte). Avenarius entrenches himself against the “prevailing”
“metaphysics” which persists in regarding the brain as the organ of
thought and which ignores the theories of introjection and
co-ordination. By the given or the found (_das Vorgefundene_), Avenarius
means the indissoluble connection between the _self_ and the
environment, which leads to a confused idealist interpretation of
“experience.”

Hence, both the materialist and the idealist, as well as the Humean and
the Kantian lines in philosophy may unquestionably be concealed beneath
the word “experience";   but neither the definition of experience as an
object of investigation,[2] nor its definition as a means of knowledge
is decisive in this respect. Carstanjen’s remarks against Wundt
especially have no relation whatever to the question of the distinction
between empirio-criticism and materialism.

As a curiosity let us note that on this point Bogdanov and Valentinov,
in their reply to Plekhanov, revealed no greater knowledge of the
subject. Bogdanov declared: “It is not quite clear” (Bk. III, p.
xi).—"It is the task of empirio-criticists to examine this formulation
and to accept or reject the condition.” A very convenient position: I,
forsooth, am not a Machian and am not therefore obliged to find out in
what sense a certain Avenarius or Carstanjen speaks of experience!
Bogdanov wants to make use of Machism (and of the Machian confusion
regarding “experience"), but he does not want to be held responsible for
it.

The “pure” empirio-criticist Valentinov transcribed Plekhanov’s remark
and publicly danced the cancan; he sneered at Plekhanov for not naming
the author and for not explaining what the matter was all about (_op_.
_cit_., pp. 108-09). But at the same time this empirio-critical
philosopher in his answer said _not a single word_ on the substance of
the matter, although acknowledging that he had read Plekhanov’s remark
“three times or more” (and had apparently not under stood it). Oh, those
Machians!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] _Vierteljabrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie_, Jahrg. 22,
1898, S. 45. —_Lenin_

[2] THIS FOOTNOTE has been moved into BODY OF DOCUMENT.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 3. CAUSALITY AND NECESSITY IN NATURE


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Three: The Theory of Knowledge of Dialectical Materialism and of Empirio-Criticism. III )

3. Causality And Necessity In Nature

The question of causality is particularly important in determining the
philosophical line of any new “ism,” and we must therefore dwell on it
in some detail.

Let us begin with an exposition of the materialist theory of knowledge
on this point. L. Feuerbach’s views are expounded with particular
clarity in his reply to R. Haym already referred to.

‘Nature and human reason,’ says Haym, ‘are for him (Feuerbach)
completely divorced, and between them a gulf is formed which cannot be
spanned from one side or the other.’ Haym grounds this reproach on § 48
of my _Essence of Religion_ where it is said that ‘nature may be
conceived only through nature itself, that its necessity is neither
human nor logical, neither metaphysical nor mathematical, that nature
alone is the being to which it is impossible to apply any human measure,
although we compare and give names to its phenomena, in order to make
them comprehensible to us, and in general apply human expressions and
conceptions to them, as for example: order, purpose, law; and are
obliged to do so because of the character of our language.’ What does
this mean? Does it mean that there is no order in nature, so that, for
example, autumn may be succeeded by summer, spring by winter, winter by
autumn? That there is no purpose, so that, for example, there is no
co-ordination between the lungs and the air, between light and the eye,
between sound and the ear? That there is no law, so that, for example,
the earth may move now in an ellipse, now in a circle, that it may
revolve around the sun now in a year, now in a quarter of an hour? What
nonsense! What then is meant by this passage? Nothing more than to
distinguish between that which belongs to nature and that which be longs
to man; it does not assert that there is actually nothing in nature
corresponding to the words or ideas of order, purpose, law. All that it
does is to deny the identity between thought and being; it denies that
they exist in nature exactly as they do in the head or mind of man.
Order, purpose, law are words used by man to translate the acts of
nature into _his own_ language in order that he may understand them.
These words are not devoid of meaning or of objective content (_nicht
sinn-, d. h. gegenstandslose Worte_); nevertheless, a distinction must
be made between the original and the translation. Order, purpose, law in
the human sense express something arbitrary.

“From the contingency of order, purpose and law in nature, theism
_expressly_ infers their arbitrary origin; it infers the existence of a
being distinct from nature which brings order, purpose, law into a
nature that is in itself (_an sich_) chaotic (_dissolute_) and
indifferent to all determination.   The reason of the theists . . . is
reason contradictory to nature, reason absolutely devoid of
understanding of the essence of nature. The reason of the theists splits
nature into two beings—one material, and the other formal or spiritual”
(_Werke_, VII. Band, 1903, S. 518-20).

Thus Feuerbach recognises objective law in nature and objective
causality, which are reflected only with approximate fidelity by human
ideas of order, law and so forth. With Feuerbach the recognition of
objective law in nature is inseparably connected with the recognition of
the objective reality of the external world, of objects, bodies, things,
reflected by our mind. Feuerbach’s views are consistently materialistic.
All other views, or rather, any other philosophical line on the question
of causality, the denial of objective law, causality and necessity in
nature, are justly regarded by Feuerbach as belonging to the fideist
trend. For it is, indeed, clear that the subjectivist line on the
question of causality, the deduction of the order and necessity of
nature not from the external objective world, but from consciousness,
reason, logic, and so forth, not only cuts human reason off from nature,
not only opposes the former to the latter, but makes nature a _part_ of
reason, instead of regarding reason as a part of nature. The
subjectivist line on the ques-tion of causality is philosophical
idealism (varieties of which are the theories of causality of Hume and
Kant), _i.e._., fideism, more or less weakened and diluted. The
recognition of objective law in nature and the recognition that this law
is reflected with approximate fidelity in the mind of man is
materialism.

As regards Engels, he had, if I am not mistaken, no occasion to contrast
his materialist view with other trends on the particular question of
causality. He had no need to do so, since he had definitely dissociated
himself from all the agnostics on the more fundamental question of the
objective reality of the external world in general. But to anyone who
has read his philosophical works at all attentively it must be clear
that Engels does not admit even the shadow of a doubt as to the
existence of objective law, causality and necessity in nature. We shall
confine ourselves to a few examples. In the first section of
_Anti-Dühring_ Engels says: “In order to understand these details [of
the general picture   of the world phenomena], we must detach them from
their natural (_natürlich_) or historical connection and examine each
one separately, its nature, special causes, effects, etc.” (pp. 5-6).
That this natural connection, the connection between natural phenomena,
exists objectively, is obvious. Engels particularly emphasises the
dialectical view of cause and effect: “And we find, in like manner, that
cause and effect are conceptions which only hold good in their
application to individual cases, but as soon as we consider the
individual cases in their general connection with the universe as a
whole, they run into each other, and they become confounded when we
contemplate that universal action and reaction in which causes and
effects are eternally changing places, so that what is effect here and
now will be cause there and then, and _vice versa_” (p. 8). Hence, the
human conception of cause and effect always somewhat simplifies the
objective connection of the phenomena of nature, reflecting it only
approximately, artificially isolating one or another aspect of a single
world process. If we find that the laws of thought correspond with the
laws of nature, says Engels, this becomes quite conceivable when we take
into account that reason and consciousness are “products of the human
brain and that man himself is a product of nature.” Of course, “the
products of the human brain, being in the last analysis also products of
nature, do not contradict the rest of nature’s interconnections
(_Naturzusammenhang_) but are in correspondence with them” (p. 22).[5]
There is no doubt that there exists a natural, objective interconnection
between the phenomena of the world. Engels constantly speaks of the
“laws of nature,” of the “necessities of nature”
(_Naturnotwendigkeiten_), without considering it necessary to explain
the generally known propositions of materialism.

In _Ludwig Feuerbach_ also we read that “the general laws of motion—both
of the external world and of human thought—[are] two sets of laws which
are identical in substance but differ in their expression in so far as
the human mind can apply them consciously, while in nature and also up
to now for the most part in human history, these laws assert themselves
unconsciously in the form of external necessity in the midst of an
endless series of seeming accidents” (p. 38). And Engels reproaches the
old natural philosophy for having   replaced “the real but as yet
unknown interconnections” (of the phenomena of nature) by “ideal and
imaginary ones” (p. 42).[6] Engels’ recognition of objective law,
causality and necessity in nature is absolutely clear, as is his
emphasis on the relative character of our, _i.e_., man’s approximate
reflections of this law in various concepts.

Passing to Joseph Dietzgen, we must first note one of the innumerable
distortions committed by our Machians. One of the authors of the
_Studies_ “_in” the Philosophy of Marxism_, Mr. Helfond, tells us: “The
basic points of Dietzgen’s world outlook may be summarised in the
following propositions: . . . (9) The causal dependence which we ascribe
to things is in reality not contained in the things themselves” (p.
248). _This is sheer nonsense_. Mr. Helfond, whose own views represent a
veritable hash of materialism and agnosticism, _has outrageously
falsified_ J. Dietzgen. Of course, we can find plenty of confusion,
inexactnesses and errors in Dietzgen, such as gladden the hearts of the
Machians and oblige materialists to regard Dietzgen as a philosopher who
is not entirely consistent. But to attribute to the materialist J.
Dietzgen a direct denial of the materialist view of causality—only a
Helfond, only the Russian Machians are capable of that.

“Objective scientific knowledge,” says Dietzgen in his _The Nature of
the Workings of the Human Mind_ (German ed. 1903), “seeks for causes not
by faith or speculation, but by experience and induction, not _a
priori_, but _a posteriori_. Natural science looks for causes not
outside or back of phenomena, but within or by means of them” (pp.
94-95). “Causes are the products of the faculty of thought. They are,
however, not its pure products, but are produced by it in conjunction
with sense material. This sense material gives the causes thus derived
their objective existence. Just as we demand that a truth should be the
truth of an objective phenomenon, so we demand that a cause should be
real, that it should be the cause of some objective effect” (pp. 98-99).
“The cause of the thing is its connection” (p. 100).

It is clear from this that Mr. Helfond has made a statement which is
_directly contrary to fact_. The world outlook of materialism expounded
by J. Dietzgen recognises that “the causal dependence” is _contained_
“in the things themselves.”   It was necessary for the Machian hash that
Mr. Helfond should confuse the materialist line with the idealist line
on the question of causality.

Let us now proceed to the latter line.

A clear statement of the starting point of Avenarius’ philosophy on this
question is to be found in his first work, _Philosophie als Denken der
Welt gemäss dem Prinzip des kleinsten Kraftmasses_. In § 81 we read:
“Just as we do not experience (_erfahren_) force as causing motion, so
we do not experience the _necessity_ for any motion. . . . All we
experience (_erfahren_) is that the one follows the other.” This is the
Humean standpoint in its purest form: sensation, experience tell us
nothing of any necessity. A philosopher who asserts (on the principle of
“the economy of thought") that only sensation exists could not have come
to any other conclusion. “Since the idea of _causality_,” we read
further, “demands force and necessity or constraint as integral parts of
the effect, so it falls together with the latter” (§ 82). “Necessity
therefore expresses a particular degree of probability with which the
effect is, or may be, expected” (§ 83, thesis).

This is outspoken subjectivism on the question of causality. And if one
is at all consistent one cannot come to any other conclusion unless one
recognises objective reality as the source of our sensations.

Let us turn to Mach. In a special chapter, “Causality and Explanation”
(_Wärmelehre_, 2. Auflage, 1900, S. 432-39), we read: “The Humean
criticism (of the conception of causality) nevertheless retains its
validity.” Kant and Hume (Mach does not trouble to deal with other
philosophers) solve the problem of causality differently. “We prefer”
Hume’s solution. “Apart from _logical_ necessity [Mach’s italics] no
other necessity, for instance physical necessity, exists.” This is
exactly the view which was so vigorously combated by Feuerbach. It never
even occurs to Mach to deny his kinship with Hume. Only the Russian
Machians could go so far as to assert that Hume’s agnosticism could be
“combined” with Marx’s and Engels’ materialism. In Mach’s _Mechanik_, we
read: “In nature there is neither cause nor effect” (S. 474, 3. Auflage,
1897). “I have repeatedly demonstrated that all forms of the law of
causality spring from subjective   motives (_Trieben_) and that there is
no necessity for nature to correspond with them” (p. 495).

We must here note that our Russian Machians with amazing naïveté replace
the question of the materialist or idealist trend of all arguments on
the law of causality by the question of one or another formulation of
this law. They believed the German empirio-critical professors that
merely to say “functional correlation” was to make a discovery in
“recent positivism” and to release one from the “fetishism” of
expressions like “necessity,” “law,” and so forth. This of course is
utterly absurd, and Wundt was fully justified in ridiculing such a
_change of words_ (in the article, quoted above, in _Philosophische
Studien_, S. 383, 388), which in fact changes nothing. Mach himself
speaks of “all forms” of the law of causality and in his _Knowledge and
Error_ (2. Auflage, S. 278) makes the self-evident reservation that the
concept function can express the “dependence of elements” more precisely
only when the possibility is achieved of expressing the results of
investigation in _measurable_ quantities, which even in sciences like
chemistry has only partly been achieved. Apparently, in the opinion of
our Machians, who are so credulous as to professorial discoveries,
Feuerbach (not to mention Engels) did not know that the concepts order,
law, and so forth, can under certain conditions be expressed as a
mathematically defined functional relation!

The really important epistemological question that divides the
philosophical trends is not the degree of precision attained by our
descriptions of causal connections, or whether these descriptions can be
expressed in exact mathematical formulas, but whether the source of our
knowledge of these connections is objective natural law or properties of
our mind, its innate faculty of apprehending certain _a priori_ truths,
and so forth. This is what so irrevocably divides the materialists
Feuerbach, Marx and Engels from the agnostics (Humeans) Avenarius and
Mach.

In certain parts of his works, Mach, whom it would be a sin to accuse of
consistency, frequently “forgets” his agreement with Hume and his own
subjectivist theory of causality and argues “simply” as a natural
scientist, _i.e._., from the instinctive materialist standpoint. For
instance,   in his _Mechanik_, we read of “the uniformity which nature
teaches us to find in its phenomena” (French ed., p. 182). But if we _do
find_ uniformity in the phenomena of nature, does this mean that
uniformity exists objectively outside our mind? No. On the question of
the uniformity of nature Mach also delivers himself thus: “The power
that prompts us to complete in thought facts only partially observed is
the power of association. It is greatly strengthened by repetition. It
then appears to us to be a power which is independent of our will and of
individual facts, a power which directs thoughts _and_ [Mach’s italics]
facts, which keeps both in mutual correspondence as a law governing
both. That we consider ourselves capable of making predictions with the
help of such a law only [!] proves that there is sufficient uniformity
in our environment, but it does not prove the necessity of the success
of our predictions” (_Wärmelehre_, S. 383).

It follows that we may and ought to look for a necessity _apart from_
the uniformity of our environment, _i.e._., of nature! Where to look for
it is the secret of idealist philosophy which is afraid to recognise
man’s perceptive faculty as a simple reflection of nature. In his last
work, _Knowledge and Error_ Mach even defines a law of nature as a
“limitation of expectation” (2. Auflage, S. 450 ff.)! Solipsism claims
its own.

Let us examine the position of other writers of the same philosophical
trend. The Englishman, Karl Pearson, expresses himself with
characteristic precision (_The Grammar of Science_, 2nd ed.): “The laws
of science are products of the human mind rather than factors of the
external world” (p. 36). “Those, whether poets or materialists, who do
homage to nature, as the sovereign of man, too often forget that the
order and complexity they admire are at least as much a product of man’s
perceptive and reasoning faculties as are their own memories and
thoughts” (p. 185). “The comprehensive character of natural law is due
to the ingenuity of the human mind” (_ibid_.). “_Man is the maker of
natural law_,” it is stated in Chapter III, § 4. “There is more meaning
in the statement that man gives laws to nature than in its converse that
nature gives laws to man,” although the worthy professor is regretfully
obliged to admit, the latter (materialist)   view is “unfortunately far
too common today” (p. 87). In the fourth chapter, which is devoted to
the question of causality, Pearson formulates the following _thesis_ (§
11): “_The necessity lies in the world of conceptions and not in the
world of perceptions_.” It should be noted that for Pearson perceptions
or sense-impressions are the reality existing outside us. “In the
uniformity with which sequences of perception are repeated (the routine
of perceptions) there is also no inherent necessity, but it is a
necessary condition for the existence of thinking beings that there
should be a routine in the perceptions. The necessity thus lies in the
nature of the thinking being and not in the perceptions themselves; thus
it is conceivably a product of the perceptive faculty (p. 139)

Our Machian, with whom Mach himself frequently expresses complete
solidarity, thus arrives safely and soundly at pure Kantian idealism: it
is man who dictates laws to nature and not nature that dictates laws to
man! The important thing is not the repetition of Kant’s doctrine of
apriorism—which does not define the idealist line in philosophy as such,
but only a particular formulation of this line—but the fact that reason,
mind, consciousness are here primary, and nature secondary. It is not
reason that is a part of nature, one of its highest products, the
reflection of its processes, but nature that is a part of reason, which
thereby is stretched from the ordinary, simple human reason known to us
all to a “stupendous,” as Dietzgen puts it, mysterious, divine reason.
The Kantian-Machian formula, that “man gives laws to nature,” is a
fideist formula. If our Machians stare wide-eyed on reading Engels’
statement that the fundamental characteristic of materialism is the
acceptance of nature and not spirit as primary, it only shows how
incapable they are of distinguishing the really important philosophical
trends from the mock erudition and sage jargon of the professors.

J. Petzoldt, who in his two-volume work analysed and developed
Avenarius, may serve as an excellent example of reactionary Machian
scholasticism. “Even to this day,” says he, “one hundred and fifty years
after Hume, substantiality and causality paralyse the daring of the
thinker” (_Introduction to the Philosophy of Pure Experience_, Bd. I, S.
31). It goes without saying that those who are most “daring” are the
solipsists   who discovered sensation without organic matter, thought
without brain, nature without objective law! “And the last formulation
of causality, which we have not yet mentioned, necessity, or _necessity
in nature_, contains something vague and mystical"—(the idea of
“fetishism,” “anthropomorphism,” etc.) (pp. 32, 34). Oh, the poor
mystics, Feuerbach, Marx and Engels! They have been talking all the time
of necessity in nature, and have even been calling those who hold the
Humean position theoretical reactionaries! Petzoldt rises above all
“anthropomorphism.” He has discovered the great “_law of unique
determination_,” which eliminates every obscurity, every trace of
“fetishism,” etc., etc., etc. For example, the parallelogram of forces
(p. 35). This cannot be “proven"; it must be accepted as a “fact of
experience.” It cannot be conceded that a body under like impulses will
move in different ways. “We cannot concede nature such indefiniteness
and arbitrariness; we must demand from it definiteness and law” (p. 35).
Well, well! We demand of nature obedience to law. The bourgeoisie
demands reaction of its professors. “Our thought demands definiteness
from nature, and nature always conforms to this demand; we shall even
see that in a certain sense it is compelled to conform to it” (p. 36).
Why, having received an impulse in the direction of the line AB, does a
body move towards C and not towards D or F, etc.?

[line AB towards C]

“Why does nature not choose any of the countless other directions?” (p.
37). Because that would be “multiple determination,” and the great
empirio-critical discovery of Joseph Petzoldt demands _unique
determination_.

The “empirio-criticists” fill scores of pages with such unutterable
trash!

“. . . We have remarked more than once that our thesis does not derive
its force from a sum of separate experiences, but   that, on the
contrary, we demand that nature should recognise its validity (_seine
Geltung_). Indeed, even before it becomes a law it has already become
for us a principle with which we approach reality, a postulate. It is
valid, so to speak, _a priori_, independently of all separate
experiences. It would, indeed, be unbefitting for a philosophy of pure
experience to preach _a priori_ truths and thus relapse into the most
sterile metaphysics. Its apriorism can only be a logical one, never a
psychological, or metaphysical one” (p. 40). Of course, if we call
apriorism logical, then the reactionary nature of the idea disappears
and it becomes elevated to the level of “recent positivism"!

There can be no unique determination of psychical phenomena, Petzoldt
further teaches us; the role of imagination, the significance of great
inventions, etc., here create exceptions, while the law of nature, or
the law of spirit, tolerates “no exceptions” (p. 65). We have before us
a pure metaphysician, who has not the slightest inkling of the
relativity of the difference between the contingent and the necessary.

I may, perhaps, be reminded—continues Petzoldt—of the motivation of
historical events or of the development of character in poetry. “If we
examine the matter carefully we shall find that there is no such unique
determination. There is not a single historical event or a single drama
in which we could not imagine the participants acting differently under
similar psychical conditions. . .” (p. 73). “Unique determination is not
only absent in the realm of the psychical, but we are also entitled to
_demand_ its absence from reality [Petzoldt’s italics]. Our doctrine is
thus elevated to the rank of a _postulate_, _i.e._., to the rank of a
fact, which we regard as a necessary condition of a much earlier
experience, as its _logical a priori_” (Petzoldt’s italics, p. 76).

And Petzoldt continues to operate with this “logical _a priori_” in both
volumes of his _Introduction_, and in the booklet issued in 1906, _The
World Problem from the Positivist Standpoint_.^([1]) Here is a second
instance of a noted empirio-criticist   who has imperceptibly slipped
into Kantianism and who serves up the most reactionary doctrines with a
somewhat different sauce. And this is not fortuitous, for at the very
foundations of Mach’s and Avenarius’ teachings on causality there lies
an idealist falsehood, which no highflown talk of “positivism” can cover
up. The distinction between the Humean and the Kantian theories of
causality is only a secondary difference of opinion between agnostics
who are basically at one, _viz_., in their denial of objective law in
nature, and who thus inevitably condemn themselves to idealist
conclusions of one kind or another. A rather more “scrupulous”
empirio-criticist than J. Petzoldt, Rudolf Willy, who is ashamed of his
kinship with the immanentists, rejects, for example, Petzoldt’s whole
theory of “unique determination” as leading to nothing but “logical
formalism.” But does Willy improve his position by disavowing Petzoldt?
Not in the least, for he disavows Kantian agnosticism solely for the
sake of Humean agnosticism. “We have known from the time of Hume,” he
writes, “that ‘necessity’ is a purely logical (not a ‘transcendental’)
characteristic (_Merkmal_), or, as I would rather say and have already
said, a purely verbal (_sprachlich_) characteristic” (R. Willy, _Gegen
die Schulweisheit_, München, 1905, S. 91; cf. S. 173, 175).

The agnostic calls our materialist view of necessity “transcendental,”
for from the standpoint of Kantian and Humean “school wisdom,” which
Willy does not reject but only furbishes up, any recognition of
objective reality given us in experience is an illicit “transcendence.”

Among the French writers of the philosophical trend we are analysing, we
find Henri Poincaré constantly straying into this same path of
agnosticism. Henri Poincaré is an eminent physicist but a poor
philosopher, whose errors Yushkevich, of course, declared to be the last
word of recent positivism, so “recent,” indeed, that it even required a
new “ism,” _viz_., empirio-symbolism. For Poincaré (with whose views as
a whole we shall deal in the chapter on the new physics), the laws of
nature are symbols, conventions, which man creates for the sake of
“_convenience_.” “The only true objective reality is the internal
harmony of the world.” By “objective,” Poincaré means that which is
generally   regarded as valid, that which is accepted by the majority of
men, or by all[2] ; that is to say, in a purely subjectivist manner he
destroys objective truth, as do all the Machians. And as regards
“harmony,” he categorically declares in answer to the question whether
it exists _outside of us_—"undoubtedly, no.” It is perfectly obvious
that the new terms do not in the least change the ancient philosophical
position of agnosticism, for the essence of Poincaré’s “original” theory
amounts to a denial (although he is far from consistent) of objective
reality and of objective law in nature. It is, therefore, perfectly
natural that in contradistinction to the Russian Machians, who accept
new formulations of old errors as the latest discoveries, the German
Kantians greeted such views as a conversion to their own views, _i.e._.,
to agnosticism, on a fundamental question of philosophy. “The French
mathematician Henri Poincaré,” we read in the work of the Kantian,
Philipp Frank, “holds the point of view that many of the most general
laws of theoretical natural science (_e_._g_., the law of inertia, the
law of the conservation of energy, etc.), of which it is so often
difficult to say whether they are of empirical or of _a priori_ origin,
are, in fact, neither one nor the other, but are purely conventional
propositions depending upon human discretion. . . .” “Thus [exults the
Kantian] the latest _Naturphilosophie_ unexpectedly renews the
fundamental idea of critical idealism, namely, that experience merely
fills in a framework which man brings with him from nature. . . ."^([3])

We quote this example in order to give the reader a clear idea of the
degree of naïveté of our Yushkeviches, who take a “theory of symbolism”
for something genuinely _new_, whereas philosophers in the least versed
in their subject say plainly and explicitly: he has become converted to
the standpoint of critical idealism! For the essence of this point of
view does not necessarily lie in the repetition of Kant’s formulations,
but in the recognition of the fundamental idea _common_ to both Hume and
Kant, _viz_., the denial of objective law in nature and the deduction of
particular   “conditions of experience,” particular principles,
postulates and propositions _from the subject_, from human
consciousness, and not from nature. Engels was right when he said that
it is not important to which of the numerous schools of materialism or
idealism a particular philosopher belongs, but rather whether he takes
nature, the external world, matter in motion, or spirit, reason,
consciousness, etc., as primary.

Another characterisation of Machism on this question, in contrast to the
other philosophical lines, is given by the expert Kantian, E. Lucka. On
the question of causality “Mach entirely agrees with Hume."^([4]) “P.
Volkmann derives the necessity of thought from the necessity of the
processes of nature—a standpoint that, in contradistinction to Mach and
in agreement with Kant, recognises the fact of necessity; but contrary
to Kant, it seeks the source of necessity not in thought, but in the
processes of nature” (p. 424).

Volkmann is a physicist who writes fairly extensively on epistemological
questions, and who tends, as do the vast majority of scientists, to
materialism, albeit an inconsistent, timid, and incoherent materialism.
The recognition of necessity in nature and the derivation from it of
necessity in thought is materialism. The derivation of necessity,
causality, law, etc., from thought is idealism. The only inaccuracy in
the passage quoted is that a total denial of all necessity is attributed
to Mach. We have already seen that this is not true either of Mach or of
the empirio-critical trend generally, which, having definitely departed
from materialism, is inevitably sliding into idealism.

It remains for us to say a few words about the Russian Machians in
particular. They would like to be Marxists; they have all “read” Engels’
decisive demarcation of materialism from the Humean trend; they could
not have failed to learn both from Mach himself and from everybody in
the least acquainted with his philosophy that Mach and Avenarius follow
the line of Hume. Yet they are all careful _not to say a single word_
about Humism and materialism on the question   of causality! Their
confusion is utter. Let us give a few examples. Mr. P. Yushkevich
preaches the “new” empirio-symbolism. The “sensations of blue, hard,
etc.—these supposed data of pure experience” and “the creations
supposedly of pure reason, such as a chimera or a chess game"—all these
are “empirio-symbols” (_Studies_, _etc_., p. 179). “Knowledge is
empirio-symbolic, and as it develops leads to empirio-symbols of a
greatet degree of symbolisation. . . . The so-called laws of nature . .
. are these empirio-symbols. . .” (_ibid_.). “The so-called true
reality, being in itself, is that infinite [a terribly learned fellow,
this Mr. Yushkevich!] ultimate system of symbols to which all our
knowledge is striving” (p. 188). “The stream of experience . . . which
lies at the foundation of our knowledge is . . . irrational . . .
illogical” (pp. 187, 194). Energy “is just as little a thing, a
substance, as time, space, mass and the other fundamental concepts of
science: energy is a constancy, an empirio-symbol, like other
empirio-symbols that for a time satisfy the fundamental human need of
introducing reason, Logos, into the irrational stream of experience” (p.
209).

Clad like a harlequin in a garish motley of shreds of the “latest”
terminology, there stands before us a subjective idealist, for whom the
external world, nature and its laws are all symbols of our knowledge.
The stream of experience is devoid of reason, order and law: our
knowledge brings reason into it. The celestial bodies are symbols of
human knowledge, and so is the earth. If science teaches us that the
earth existed long before it was possible for man and organic matter to
have appeared, we, you see, have changed all that! The order of the
motion of the planets is brought about _by us_, it is a product of our
knowledge. And sensing that human reason is being inflated by such a
philosophy into the author and founder of nature, Mr. Yushkevich puts
alongside of reason the word _Logos_, that is, reason in the abstract,
not reason, but Reason, not a function of the human brain, but something
existing prior to any brain, something divine. The last word of “recent
positivism” is that old formula of fideism which Feuerbach had already
exposed.

Let us take A. Bogdanov. In 1899, when he was still a semi-materialist
and had only just begun to go astray under the influence of a very great
chemist and very muddled philosopher, Wilhelm Ostwald, he wrote: “The
general causal connection of phenomena is the last and best child of
human knowledge; it is the universal law, the highest of those laws
which, to express it in the words of a philosopher, human reason
dictates to nature” (_Fundamental Elements_, _etc_., p. 41).

Allah alone knows from what source Bogdanov took this reference. But the
fact is that “the words of a philosopher” trustingly repeated by the
“Marxist"—are the words of Kant. An unpleasant event! And all the more
unpleasant in that it cannot even be explained by the “mere” influence
of Ostwald.

In 1904, having already managed to discard both natural-historical
materialism and Ostwald, Bogdanov wrote: “. . . Modern positivism
regards the law of causality only as a means of cognitively connecting
phenomena into a continuous series, only as a form of co-ordinating
experience” (_From the Psychology of Society_, p. 207). Bogdanov either
did not know, or would not admit, that this modern positivism is
agnosticism and that it denies the objective necessity of nature, which
existed prior to, and outside of, “knowledge” and man. He accepted on
faith what the German professors called “modern positivism.” Finally, in
1905, having passed through all the previous stages and the stage of
empirio-criticism, and being already in the stage of “empirio-monism,”
Bogdanov wrote: “Laws do not belong to the sphere of experience . . .
they are not given in it, but are created by thought as a means of
organising experience, of harmoniously co-ordinating it into a
symmetrical whole” (_Empirio-Monism_, I, p. 40). “Laws are abstractions
of knowledge; and physical laws possess physical properties just as
little as psychological laws possess psychical properties” (_ibid_.).

And so, the law that winter succeeds autumn and the spring winter is not
given us in experience but is created by thought as a means of
organising, harmonising, co-ordinating. . . what with what, Comrade
Bogdanov?

“Empirio-monism is possible only because knowledge actively harmonises
experience, eliminating its infinite contradictions, creating for it
universal organising forms, replacing the primeval chaotic world of
elements by a derivative, ordered world of relations” (p. 57). That is
not true. The idea that knowledge can “create” universal forms, replace
the primeval chaos by order, etc., is the idea of idealist philosophy.
The world is matter moving in conformity to law, and our knowledge,
being the highest product of nature, is in a position only to _reflect_
this conformity to law.

In brief, our Machians, blindly believing the “recent” reactionary
professors, repeat the mistakes of Kantian and Humean agnosticism on the
question of causality and fail to notice either that these doctrines are
in absolute contradiction to Marxism, _i.e._., materialism, or that they
themselves are rolling down an inclined plane towards idealism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] J. Petzoldt, _Das Weltproblem von positivistischein Standpunkte
aus_, Leipzig, 1906, S. 130: “Also from the empirical standpoint there
can be a logical _a priori_; causality is the logical _a priori_ of the
experienced (_erfahrungsmässige_) permanence of our environment.”
—_Lenin_

[2] Henri Poincaré, _La valeur de la science_ [_The Value of Science_],
Paris, 1905, pp. 7, 9. There is a Russian translation. —_Lenin_

[3] _Annalen der Naturphilosophie_,^([7]) VI. B., 1907, S. 443, 447.
—_Lenin_

[4] E. Lucka, _Das Erkenntnisproblem und Machs_ “_Analyse der
Empfindungen_” [_The Problem of Knowledge and Mach’s_ “_Analysis of
Sensations_"], in _Kantstudien_, VIII. Bd.. S. 409. —_Lenin_

[5] See F. Engels, _Anti-Duhring,_ Moscov.’, 1959, pp. 33, 36, 55.

[6] See K. Marx and F. Engels, _Selected Works,_ Vol. II, Moscow, 1958,
pp. 387, 389. p.

[7] _Annlen der Neturphilosophie (Annals of Natural Philosophy)—_ a
journal of a positivist tendency, published by Wilhelm Ostwald in
Leipzig from 1901 to 1921. Its contributors included Ernst Mach, Paul
Volkmann and others. 60. See F. Engels, _Anti-Duhring,_ Moscow, 1959, p.
135. 61. See F. Engels, _Anti-Duhring,_ Moscow, 1959, p. 76.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 4. THE 'PRINCIPLE OF ECONOMY OF THOUGHT' AND THE PROBLEM OF THE 'UNITY OF THE WORLD'


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Three: The Theory of Knowledge of Dialectical Materialism and of Empirio-Criticism. III )

4. The “Principle Of Economy Of Thought” And The Problem Of The “Unity Of The World”

“The principle of ‘the least expenditure of energy,’ which Mach,
Avenarius and many others made the basis of the theory of knowledge, is
. . . unquestionably a ‘Marxist’ tendency in epistemology.”

So Bazarov asserts in the _Studies_, _etc_., page 69.

There is “economy” in Marx; there is “economy” in Mach. But is it indeed
“unquestionable” that there is even a shadow of resemblance between the
two?

Avenarius’ work, _Philosophie als Denken der Welt gemäss dem Prinzip des
Kleinsten Kraftmasses_ (1876), as we have seen, applies this “principle”
in such a way that in the name of “economy of thought” sensation alone
is declared to exist. Both causality and “substance” (a word which the
professorial gentlemen, “for the sake of importance,” prefer to the
clearer and more exact word: matter) are declared “eliminated” on the
same plea of economy. Thus we get sensation without matter and thought
without brain. This utter nonsense is an attempt to smuggle in
_subjective idealism_ under a new guise. That _such_ precisely is the
character of this basic work on the celebrated “economy of thought” is,
as   we have seen, _generally acknowledged_ in philosophical literature.
That our Machians did not notice the subjective idealism under the “new”
flag is a fact belonging to the realm of curiosities.

In the _Analysis of Sensations_ (Russ. trans., p. 49), Mach refers
incidentally to his work of 1872 on this question. And this work, as we
have seen, propounds the standpoint of pure subjectivism and reduces the
world to sensations. Thus, both the fundamental works which introduce
this famous “principle” into philosophy expound idealism! What is the
reason for this? The reason is that if the principle of economy of
thought is really made “_the basis_ of the theory of knowledge,” it can
lead to _nothing but_ subjective idealism. That it is more “economical”
to “think” that only I and my sensations exist is unquestionable,
provided we want to introduce such an absurd conception into
_epistemology_.

Is it “more economical” to “think” of the atom as indivisible, or as
composed of positive and negative electrons? Is it “more economical” to
think of the Russian bourgeois revolution as being conducted by the
liberals or as being conducted against the liberals? One has only to put
the question in order to see the absurdity, the subjectivism of applying
the category of “the economy of thought” _here_. Human thought is
“economical” only when it _correctly_ reflects objective truth, and the
criterion of this correctness is practice, experiment and industry. Only
by denying objective reality, that is, by denying the _foundations_ of
Marxism, can one seriously speak of economy of thought in the theory of
knowledge.

If we turn to Mach’s later works, we shall find in them an
_interpretation_ of the celebrated principle which frequently amounts to
its complete denial. For instance, in the _Wärmelehre_ Mach returns to
his favourite idea of “the economical nature” of science (2nd German
ed., p. 366). But there he adds that we engage in an activity not for
the sake of the activity (p. 366; repeated on p. 391): “the purpose of
scientific activity is to present the fullest . . . most tranquil . . .
picture possible of the world” (p. 366). If this is the case, the
“principle of economy” is banished not only from the basis of
epistemology, but virtually from epistemology   generally. When one says
that the purpose of science is to present a the picture of the world
(tranquillity is entirely beside the point here), one is repeating the
materialist point of view. When one says this, one is admitting the
objective reality of the world in relation to our knowledge, of the
model in relation to the picture. To talk of _economy_ of thought in
_such_ a connection is merely to use a clumsy and ridiculously
pretentious _word_ in place of the word “correctness.” Mach is muddled
here, as usua], and the Machians behold the muddle and worship it!

In _Knowledge and Error_, in the chapter entitled “Illustrations of
Methods of Investigation,” we read the following:

“The ‘complete and simplest description’ (Kirchhoff, 1874), the
‘economical presentation of the factual’ (Mach, 1872), the ‘concordance
of thinking and being and the mutual concordance of the processes of
thought’ (Grassmann, 1844)—all these, with slight variations, express
one and the same thought.”

Is this not a model of confusion? “Economy of thought,” from which Mach
in 1872 inferred that sensations _alone_ exist (a point of view which he
himself subsequently was obliged to acknowledge an idealist one), is
declared to be _equivalent_ to the purely materialist dictum of the
mathematician Grassmann regarding the necessity of co-ordinating
thinking and _being_, equivalent to the simplest _description_ (of an
_objective reality_, the existence of which it never occurred to
Kirchhoff to doubtl).

_Such_ an application of the principle of “economy of thought” is but an
example of Mach’s curious philosophical waverings. And if such
curiosities and lapses are eliminated, the idealist character of “the
principle of the economy of thought” becomes unquestionable. For
example, the Kantian Hönigswald, controverting the philosophy of Mach,
greets his “principle of economy” as an _approach_ to the “Kantian
circle of ideas” (Dr. Richard Hönigswald, _Zur Kritik der Machschen
Philosophie_ [_A Critique of Mach’s Philosophy_], Berlin, 1903, S. 27).
And, in truth, if we do not recognise the objective reality given us in
our sensations, whence are we to derive the “principle of economy” if
not _from the subject_? Sensations, of course, do not contain any
“economy.” Hence, thought gives us something which is not contained in
sensations! Hence, the   “principle of economy” is not taken from
experience (_i.e._., sensations), but precedes all experience and, like
a Kantian category, constitutes a logical condition of experience.
Hönigswald quotes the following passage from the _Analysis of
Sensations_: “We can from our bodily and spiritual stability infer the
stability, the uniqueness of determination and the uniformity of the
processes of nature” (Russ. trans., p. 281). And, indeed, the
subjective-idealist character of such propositions and the kinship of
Mach to Petzoldt, who has gone to the length of apriorism, are beyond
all shadow of doubt.

In connection with “the principle of the economy of thought,” the
idealist Wundt very aptly characterised Mach as “Kant turned inside out”
(_Systematische Philosophie_, Leipzig, 1907, S. 128). Kant has _a
priori_ and experience, Mach has experience and _a priori_, for Mach’s
principle of the econ omy of thought is essentially apriorism (p. 130).
The con nection (_Verknüpfung_) is either in things, as an “objective
law of nature [and this Mach emphatically rejects], or else it is a
subjective principle of description” (p. 130). The principle of economy
with Mach is subjective and _kommt wie aus der Pistole
geschossen_—appears nobody knows whence—as a teleological principle
which may have a diversity of meanings (p. 131). As you see, experts in
philosophical terminology are not as naïve as our Machians, who are
blindly prepared to believe that a “new” term can eliminate the contrast
between subjectivism and objectivism, between idealism and materialism.

Finally, let us turn to the English philosopher James Ward, who without
circumlocution calls himself a spiritualist monist. He does not
controvert Mach, but, as we shall see later, utilises the entire Machian
trend in physics in his fight against materialism. And he definitely
declares that with Mach “the criterion of simplicity . . . is in the
main subjective, not objective” (_Naturalism and Agnosticism_, Vol. I,
3rd ed., p. 82).

That the principle of the economy of thought as the basis of
epistemology pleased the German Kantians and English spiritualists will
not seem strange after all that has been said above. That people who are
desirous of being Marxists should link the political economy of the
materialist Marx   with the epistemological economy of Mach is simply
ludicrous.

It would be appropriate here to say a few words about “the unity of the
world.” On this question Mr. P. Yushkevich strikingly exemplifies—for
the thousandth time perhaps—the abysmal confusion created by our
Machians. Engels, in his _Anti-Dühring_, replies to Dühring, who had
deduced the unity of the world from the unity of thought, as follows:
“The real unity of the world consists in its materiality, and this is
proved not by a few juggling phrases, but by a long and protracted
development of philosophy and natural science” (p. 31).^([1]) Mr.
Yushkevich cites this passage and retorts: “First of all it is not clear
what is meant here by the assertion that ‘the unity of the world
consists in its materiality’” (_op_. _cit_., p. 52).

Charming, is it not? This individual undertakes publicly to prate about
the philosophy of Marxism, and then declares that the most elementary
propositions of materialism are “not clear” to him! Engels showed, using
Dühring as an example, that any philosophy that claims to be consistent
can deduce the unity of the world either from thought—in which case it
is helpless against spiritualism and fideism (_Anti-Dühring_, p. 30),
and its arguments inevitably become mere phrase-juggling—or from the
objective reality which exists outside us, which in the theory of
knowledge has long gone under the name of matter, and which is studied
by natural science. It is useless to speak seriously to an individual to
whom such a thing is “not clear,” for he says it is “not clear” in order
fraudulently to evade giving a genuine answer to Engels’ clear
materialist proposition. And, doing so, he talks pure Dühringian
nonsense about “the cardinal postulate of the fundamental homogeneity
and connection of being” (Yushkevich, _op_. _cit_., p. 51), about
postulates being “propositions” of which “it would not be exact to say
that they have been deduced from expericnce, since scientific experience
is possible only because they are made the basis of investigation”
(_ibid_.). This is nothing but twaddle, for if this individual had the
slightest respect for the printed word he would detect the _idealist_
character in general, and the _Kantian_ character in particular of the
idea that there can be postulates which are not taken from experience  
and without which experience is impossible. A jumble of words culled
from diverse books and coupled with the obvious errors of the
materialist Dietzgen—such is the “philosophy” of Mr. Yushkevich and his
like.

Let us rather examine the argument for the unity of the world expounded
by a serious empirio-criticist, Joseph Petzoldt. Section 29, Vol. II, of
his _Introduction_ is termed: “The Tendency to a Uniform (_einheitlich_)
Conception of the Realm of Knowledge; the Postulate of the Unique
Determination of All That Happens.” And here are a few samples of his
line of reasoning: “. . . Only in _unity_ can one find that natural end
beyond which no thought can go and in which, consequently, thought, if
it takes into consideration all the facts of the given sphere, can reach
quiescence” (p. 79). “. . . It is beyond doubt that nature does not
always respond to the demand for _unity_, but it is equally beyond doubt
that in many cases it already satisfies the demand for _quiescence_ and
it must be held, in accordance with all our previous investigations,
that nature in all probability will satisfy this demand in the future in
all cases. Hence, it would be more correct to describe the actual soul
behaviour as a striving for states of stability rather than as a
striving for unity. . . . The principle of the states of stability goes
farther and deeper. . . . Haeckel’s proposal to put the kingdom of the
protista alongside the plant and animal kingdom is an untenable solution
for it creates two new difficulties in place of the former one
difficulty: while formerly the boundary between the plants and animals
was doubtful, now it becomes impossible to demarcate the protista from
both plants and animals. . . . Obviously, such a state is not final
(_endgültig_). Such _ambiguity_ of concepts must in one way or another
be eliminated, if only, should there be no other means, by an agreement
between the specialists, or by a majority vote” (pp. 80-81).

Enough, I think? It is evident that the ernpirio-criticist Petzoldt is
_not one whit_ better than Dühring. But we must be fair even to an
adversary; Petzoldt at least has sufficient scientific integrity to
reject materialism as a philosophical trend _unflinchingly and
decisively_ in all his works. At least, he does not humiliate himself to
the extent of posing as a materialist and declaring that the most
elementary distinction between the fundamental philosophical trends is
“not clear.”

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] See F. Engels, _Anti-Duhring,_ Moscov.’, 1959, pp. 65.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 5. SPACE AND TIME


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Three: The Theory of Knowledge of Dialectical Materialism and of Empirio-Criticism. III )

5. Space And Time

Recognising the existence of objective reality, _i.e._., matter in
motion, independently of our mind, materialism must also inevitably
recognise the objective reality of time and space, in contrast above all
to Kantianism, which in this question sides with idealism and regards
time and space not as objective realities but as forms of human
understanding. The basic difference between the two fundamental
philosophical lines on this question is also quite clearly recognised by
writers of the most diverse trends who are in any way consistent
thinkers. Let us begin with the materialists.

“Space and time,” says Feuerbach, “are not mere forms of phenomena but
essential conditions (Wesensbedingungen) . . . of being” (_Werke_, II,
S. 332). Regarding the sensible world we know through sensations as
objective reality, Feuerbach naturally also rejects the phenomenalist
(as Mach would call his own conception) or the agnostic (as Engels calls
it) conception of space and time. Just as things or bodies are not mere
phenomena, not complexes of sensations, but objective realities acting
on our senses, so space and time are not mere forms of phenomena, but
objectively real forms of being. There is nothing in the world but
matter in motion, and matter in motion cannot move otherwise than in
space and time. Human conceptions of space and time are relative, but
these relative conceptions go to compound absolute truth. These relative
conceptions, in their development, move towards absolute truth and
approach nearer and nearer to it. The mutability of human conceptions of
space and time no more refutes the objective reality of space and time
than the mutability of scientific knowledge of the structure and forms
of matter in motion refutes the objective reality of the external world.

Engels, exposing the inconsistent and muddled materialist Dühring,
catches him on the very point where he speaks of the change in the
_idea_ of time (a question beyond controversy for contemporary
philosophers of any importance even of the _most diverse_ philosophical
trends) but _evades_ a direct answer to the question: are space and time
real or ideal, and are our relative conceptions of space and time
_approximations_ to objectively real forms of being, or are they only
products   of the developing, organising, harmonising, etc., human mind?
This and this alone is the basic epistemological problem on which the
truly fundamental philosophical trends are divided. Engels, in
_Anti-Dühring_, says: “We are here not in the least concerned with what
ideas change in Herr Dühring’s head. The subject at issue is not the
_idea_ of time, but _real_ time, which Herr Dühring cannot rid him self
of so cheaply [_i.e._., by the use of such phrases as the mutability of
our conceptions]” (_Anti-Dühring_, 5th Germ. ed., S. 41).[5]

This would seem so clear that even the Yushkeviches should be able to
grasp the essence of the matter! Engels sets up against Dühring the
proposition of the _reality_, _i.e._., objective reality, of time which
is generally accepted by and obvious to every materialist, and says that
_one cannot escape_ a direct affirmation or denial of this proposition
merely by talking of the change in the _ideas_ of time and space. The
point is not that Engels denies the necessity and scientific value of
investigations into the change and development of our ideas of time and
space, but that we should give a consistent answer to the
epistemological question, _viz_., the question of the source and
significance of human knowledge in general. Any moderately intelligent
philosophical idealist—and Engels when he speaks of idealists has in
mind the great consistent idealists of classical philosophy—will readily
admit the development of our ideas of time and space; he would not cease
to be an idealist for thinking, for example, that our developing ideas
of time and space are approaching towards the absolute idea of time and
space, and so forth. It is impossible to hold consistently to a
standpoint in philosophy which is inimical to all forms of fideism and
idealism if we do not definitely and resolutely recognise that our
developing notions of time and space _reflect_ an objectively real time
and space; that here, too, as in general, they are approaching objective
truth.

“The basic forms of all being,” Engels admonishes Dühring, “are space
and time, and existence out of time is just as gross an absurdity as
existence out of space” (_op_. _cit_.).

Why was it necessary for Engels, in the first half of the quotation, to
repeat Feuerbach almost literally and, in the second, to recall the
struggle which Feuerbach fought   so successfully against the gross
absurdities of theism? Because Dühring, as one sees from this same
chapter of Engels’, could not get the ends of his philosophy to meet
without resorting now to the “final cause” of the world, now to the
“initial impulse” (which is another expression for the concept “God,”
Engels says). Dühring no doubt wanted to be a materialist and atheist no
less sincerely than our Machians want to be Marxists, but he _was
unable_ consistently to develop the philosophical point of view that
would really cut the ground from under the idealist and theist
absurdity. Since he did not recognise, or, at least, did not recognise
clearly and distinctly (for he wavered and was muddled on this
question), the objective reality of time and space, it was not
accidental but inevitable that Dühring should slide down an inclined
plane to “final causes” and “initial impulses"; for he had deprived
himself of the objective criterion which prevents one going beyond the
bounds of time and space. If time and space are _only_ concepts, man,
who created them is justified in _going beyond their bounds_, and
bourgeois professors are justified in receiving salaries from
reactionary governments for defending the right to go beyond these
bounds, for directly or indirectly defending medieal “absurdity.”

Engels pointed out to Dühring that denial of the objective reality of
time-and space is theoretically philosophical confusion, while
practically it is capitulation to, or impotence in face of, fideism.

Behold now the “teachings” of “recent positivism” on this subject. We
read in Mach: “Space and time are well ordered (_wohlgeordnete_) systems
of series of sensations” (_Mechanik_, 3. Auflage, S. 498). This is
palpable idealist nonsense, such as inevitably follows from the doctrine
that bodies are complexes of sensations. According to Mach, it is not
man with his sensations that exists in space and time, but space and
time that exist in man, that depend upon man and are generated by man.
He feels that he is falling into idealism, and “resists” by making a
host of reservations and, like Dühring, burying the question under
lengthy disquisitions (see especially _Knowledge and Error_) on the
mutability of our conceptions of space and time, their relativity, and
so forth. But this does not save   him, and cannot save him, for one can
really overcome the idealist position on this question only by
recognising the objective reality of space and time. And this Mach will
not do at any price. He constructs his epistemological theory of time
and space on the principle of relativism, and that is all. In the very
nature of things such a construction can lead to nothing but subjective
idealism, as we have already made clear when speaking of absolute and
relative truth.

Resisting the idealist conclusions which inevitably follow from his
premises, Mach argues against Kant and insists that our notion of space
is derived from experience (_Knowledge_ _and Error_, 2nd Germ. ed., pp.
350, 385). But if objective reality is _not_ given us in experience (as
Mach teaches), such an objection to Kant does not in the least destroy
the general position of agnosticism in the case _either_ of Kant _or_ of
Mach. If our notion of space is taken from experience _without being_ a
reflection of objective reality outside us, Mach’s theory remains
idealistic. The existence of nature _in time_, measured in millions of
years, _prior_ to the appearance of man and human experience, shows how
absurd this idealist theory is.

“In the physiological respect,” writes Mach, “time and space are systems
of sensations of orientation which together with sense-perceptions
determine the discharge (_Auslösung_) of biologically purposive
reactions of adaptation. In the physical respect, time and space are
interdependencies of physical elements” (_ibid_., p. 434).

The relativist Mach confines himself to an examination of the _concept_
of time in its various aspects! And like Dühring he gets nowhere. If
“elements” are sensations, then the dependence of physical elements upon
each other cannot exist outside of man, and could not have existed prior
to man and prior to organic matter. If the sensations of time and space
can give man a biologically purposive orientation, this can only be so
on the condition that these sensations reflect an _objective reality_
outside man: man could never have adapted himself biologically to the
environment if his sensations had not given him an _objectively correct_
presentation of that environment. The theory of space and time is
inseparably connected with the answer to the fundamental question of
epistemology: are our sensations images of bodies and things, or are
bodies   complexes of our sensations? Mach merely blunders about beiween
t’ne two answers.

In modern physics, he says, Newton’s idea of absolute time and space
prevails (pp. 442-44), of time and space as such. This idea seems “to
us” senseless, Mach continues—apparently not suspecting the existence of
materialists and of a materialist theory of knowledge. But _in
practice_, he claims, this view was _harmless_ (_unschädlich_, p. 442)
and therefore for a long time escaped criticism.

This naïve remark regarding the harmlessness of the materialist view
betrays Mach completely. Firstly, it is not true that for a “long time”
the idealists did not criticise this view. Mach simply ignores the
struggle between the idealist and materialist theories of knowledge on
this question; he evades giving a plain and direct statement of these
two views. Secondly, by recognising “the harmlessness” of the
materialist views he contests, Mach thereby in fact admits their
correctness. For if they were incorrect, how could they have remained
harmless throughout the course of centuries? What has become of the
criterion of practice with which Mach attempted to flirt? The
materialist view of the objective reality of time and space can be
“harmless” only because natural science _does not transcend_ the bounds
of time and space, the bounds of the material world, leaving this
occupation to the professors of reactionary philosophy. Such
“harmlessness” is equivalent to correctness.

It is Mach’s idealist view of space and time that is “harmful,” for, in
the first place, it opens the door wide for fideism and, in the second
place, _seduces_ Mach himself into drawing reactionary conclusions. For
instance, in 1872 Mach wrote that “one does not have to conceive of the
chemical elements in a space of three dimensions” (_Erhaltung der
Arbeit_, S. 29, repeated on S. 55). To do so would be “to impose an
unnecessary restriction upon ourselves. There is no more necessity to
think of what is mere thought (_das bloss Gedachte_) spatially, that is
to say, in relation to the visible and tangible, than there is to think
of it in a definite pitch” (p. 27). “The reason why a satisfactory
theory of electricity has not yet been established is perhaps because we
have insisted on explaining electrical phenomena in terms of molecular
processes in a three-dimensional space” (p. 30).

From the standpoint of the straightforward and unmuddled Machism which
Mach openly advocated in 1872, it is indisputable that if molecules,
atoms, in a word, chemical elements, cannot be perceived, they are “mere
thought” (_das bloss Gedachte_). If so, and if space and time have no
objective reality, it is obvious that it is not essential to think of
atoms _spatially_! Let physics and chemistry “restrict themselves” to a
three-dimensional space in which matter moves; for the explanation of
electricity, however, we may seck its elements in a space which is _not_
three-dimensional!

That our Machians should circumspectly avoid all reference to this
absurdity of Mach’s, although he repeats it in 1906 (_Knowledge and
Error_, 2. Auflage, S. 418), is understandable, for otherwise they would
have to raise the question of the idealist and materialist views of
space point-blank, without evasions and without attempting to
“reconcile” these antagonistic positions. It is likewise understandable
that in the ‘seventies, when Mach was still entirely unknown and when
“orthodox physicists” even refused to publish his articles, one of the
chiefs of the immanentist school, Anton von Leclair, should _eagerly_
have seized upon _precisely this_ argument of Mach’s as a noteworthy
renunciation of materialism and recognition of idealism! For at that
time Leclair had not yet invented, or had not yet borrowed from Schuppe
and Schubert-Soldern, or J. Rehmke, the “new” sobriquet, “immanentist
school,” but _plainly_ called himself a _critical idealist_.^([1]) This
unequivocal advocate of fideism, who openly preached it in his
philosophical works, immediately proclaimed Mach a great philosopher
because of these statements, a “revolutionary in the best sense of the
word” (p. 252); and he was absolutely right. Mach’s argument amounts to
deserting science for fideism. Science was seeking, both in 1872 and in
1906, is now seeking, and is discovering—at least _it is groping its way
towards_—the atom of electricity, the electron, in three-dimensional
space. Science does not doubt that the substance   it is investigating
exists in three-dimensional space and, hence, that the particles of that
substance, although they be so small that we cannot see them, must also
“necessarily” exist in this three-dimensional space. Since 1872, during
the course of three decades of stupendous and dazzling scientific
successes in the problem of the structure of matter, the materialist
view of space and time has remained “harmless,” _i.e._., compatible, as
heretofore, with science, while the contrary view of Mach and Co. was a
“harmful” capitulation to the position of fideism.

In his _Mechanik_, Mach defends the mathematicians who are investigating
the problem of conceivable spaces with _n_ dimensions; he defends them
against the charge of drawing “preposterous” conclusions from their
investigations. The defence is absolutely and undoubtedly just, but see
the _epistemological_ position Mach takes up in this defence. Recent
mathematics, Mach says, has raised the very important and useful
question of a space of _n_ dimensions as a conceivable space;
nevertheless, three-dimensional space remains the only “real case” (_ein
wirklicher Fall_) (3rd German ed., pp. 483-85). In vain, therefore,
“have many theologians, who experience difficulty in deciding where to
place hell,” as well as the spiritualists, sought to derive advantage
from the fourth dimension (_ibid_.).

Very good! Mach refuses to join company with the theologians and the
spiritualists. But how does he dissociate himself from them in his
_theory of knowledge_? By stating that three-dimensional space alone is
real! But what sort of defence is it against the theologians and their
like when you deny objective reality to space and time? Why, it comes to
this, that when you have to dissociate yourself from the spiritualists
you resort to tacit borrowings from the materialists. For the
materialists, by recognising the real world, the matter we perceive, as
an _objective_ reality, have the right to conclude therefrom that _no_
human concept, whatever its purpose, is valid if it goes beyond the
bounds of time and space. But you Machian gentlemen deny the objective
validity of “reality” when you combat materialism, yet secretly
introduce it again when you have to combat an idealism that is
consistent, fearless and frank throughout! If in the _relative_
conception of time and space there is   nothing but relativity, if there
is no objective reality (_i.e._., reality independent of man and
mankind) reflected by these relative concepts, why should mankind, why
should the majority of mankind, not be entitled to conceive of beings
outside time and space? If Mach is entitled to seek atoms of
electricity, or atoms in general, _outside_ three-dimensional space, why
should the majority of mankind not be entitled to seek the atoms, or the
foundations of morals, _outside_ three-dimensional space?

“There has never been an accoucheur who has helped a delivery by means
of the fourth dimension,” Mach goes on to say.

An excellent argument—but only for those who regard the criterion of
practice as a confirmation of the _objective_ truth and _objective_
reality of our perceptual world. If our sensations give us an
objectively true image of the external world, existing independently of
us, the argument based on the accoucheur, on human practice generally,
is valid. But if so, Machism as a philosophical trend is not valid.

“I hope, however,” Mach continues, referring to his work of 1872, “that
nobody will defend ghost-stories (_die Kosten einer Spukgeschichte
bestreiten_) with the help of what I have said and written on this
subject.” One cannot hope that Napoleon did not die on May 5, 1821.

One cannot hope that Machism will not be used in the service of
“ghost-stories” when it has already served and continues to serve the
immanentists!

And not only the immanentists, as we shall see later. Philosophical
idealism is nothing but a disguised and embellished ghost-story. Look at
the French and English representatives of empirio-criticism, who are
less flowery than the German representatives of this philosophical
trend. Poincaré says that the concepts space and time are relative and
that it follows (for non-materialists “it follows” indeed) that “nature
does not impose them upon us, but we impose them upon nature, for we
find them convenient” (_op_. _cit_., p. 6). Does this not justify the
exultation of the German Kantians? Does this not confirm Engels’
statement that consistent philosophical doctrines must take either
nature or human thought as primary?

The views of the English Machist Karl Pearson are quite definite. He
says: “Of time as of space we cannot assert a real existence: it is not
in things but in our mode of perceiving them” (_op_. _cit_., p. 184).
This is idealism, pure and simple. “Like space, it [time] appears to us
as one of the plans on which that great sorting-machine, the human
perceptive faculty, arranges its material” (_ibid_.). Pearson’s final
conclusion, expounded as usual in clear and precise theses, is as
follows: “Space and time are not realities of the phenomenal world, but
the modes under which we perceive things apart. They are not infinitely
large nor infinitely divisible, but are essentially limited by the
contents of our perception” (p. 191, summary of Chapter V on Space and
Time).

This conscientious and scrupulous foe of materialism, with whom, we
repeat, Mach frequently expresses his complete agreement and who in his
turn explicitly expresses his agreement with Mach, invents no special
signboard for his philosophy, and without the least ambiguity names Hume
and Kant as the classics from whom he derives his philosophical trend!
(p. 192).

And while in Russia there are naïve people who believe that Machism has
provided a “new” solution of the problem of space and time, in English
writings we find that scientists, on the one hand, and idealist
philosophers, on the other, at once took up a definite position in
regard to Karl Pearson the Machian. Here, for example, is the opinion of
Lloyd Morgan, the biologist: “Physics as such accepts the phenomenal
world as external to, and for its purposes independent of, the mind of
the investigator. . . . He [Professor Pearson] is forced to a position
which is largely idealistic. . . ."^([2]) “Physics, as a science, is
wise, I take it, in dealing with space and time in frankly objective
terms, and I think the biologist may still discuss the distribution of
organisms in space and the geologist their distribution in time, without
pausing to remind their readers that after all they are only dealing
with sense-impressions and stored sense-impressions and certain forms of
perception. . . . All this may be true enough, but it is out of place
either in physics   or biology” (p. 304). Lloyd Morgan is a
representative of the kind of agnosticism that Engels calls “shamefaced
materialism,” and however “conciliatory” the tendencies of such a
philosophy are, nevertheless it proved impossible to reconcile Pearson’s
views with science. With Pearson “the mind is first in space, and then
space in it,” says another critic.[3] “There can be no doubt,” remarked
a defender of Pearson, R. J. Ryle, “that the doctrine as to the nature
of space and time which is associated with the name of Kant is the most
important positive addition which has been made to the idealistic theory
of human knowledge since the days of Bishop Berkeley; and it is one of
the noteworthy features of the _Grammar of Science_ that here, perhaps
for the first time in the writings of English men of science, we find at
once a full recognition of the general truth of Kant’s doctrine, a short
but clear exposition of it...."^([4])

Thus we find that in England the Machians themselves, their adversaries
among the scientists, and their adherents among the professional
philsophers _have not even a shadow of doubt_ as to the idealistic
character of Mach’s doctrine of time and space. Only some Russian
writers, would-be Marxists, "failed to notice" it.

“Many of Engels’ particular views,” V. Bazarov, for instance, writes, in
the _Studies_ (p. 67), “as for example, his conception of ‘pure’ time
and space, are now obsolete.”

Indeed! The views of the materialist Engels are now obsolete, but the
views of the idealist Pearson and the muddled idealist Mach are very
modern! The most curious thing of all is that Bazarov does not even
doubt that the views of space and time, _viz_., the recognition or
denial of their objective reality, can be classed among “_particular
views_,” in contradistinction to the “_starting point of the world
outlook_” spoken of by this author in his next sentence. Here you have a
glaring example of that “eclectic pauper’s broth” of which Engels was
wont to speak in reference to German philosophy of the ‘eighties. For to
contrast the “starting point” of Marx’s and Engels’ materialist world
outlook   with their “particular view” of the objective reality of time
and space is as utterly nonsensical as though you were to contrast the
“starting point” of Marx’s economic theory with his “particular view” of
surplus value. To sever Engels’ doctrine of the objective reality of
time and space from his doctrine of the transformation of
“things-in-themselves” into “things-for-us,” from his recognition of
objective and absolute truth, _viz_., the objective reality given us in
our sensations, and from his recognition of objective law, causality and
necessity in nature—is to reduce an integral philosophy to an utter
jumble. Like all the Machians, Bazarov erred in confounding the
mutability of human conceptions of time and space, their exclusively
relative character, with the immutabil-ity of the fact that man and
nature exist only in time and space, and that beings outside time and
space, as invented by the priests and maintained by the imagination of
the ignorant and downtrodden mass of humanity, are disordered fantasies,
the artifices of philosophical idealism—rotten products of a rotten
social system. The teachings of science on the structure of matter, on
the chemical composition of food, on the atom and the electron, may and
constantly do become obsolete, but the truth that man is unable to
subsist on ideas and to beget children by platonic love alone never
becomes obsolete. And a philosophy that denies the objective reality of
time and space is as absurd, as intrinsically rotten and false as is the
denial of these latter truths. The artifices of the idealists and the
agnostics are on the whole as hypocritical as the sermons on platonic
love of the pharisees!

In order to illustrate this distinction between the relativity of our
concepts of time and space and the _absolute_ opposition, within the
bounds of epistemology, between the materialist and idealist lines on
this question, I shall further quote a characteristic passage from a
very old and very pure “empirio-criticist,” namely, the Humean
Schulze-Aenesidemus who wrote in 1792:

“If we infer ‘things outside us’ from ideas and thoughts within us,
[then] space and time are something real and actually existing outside
us, for the existence of bodies can be conceived only in an existing
(_vorhandenen_) space, and the existence of changes only in an existing
time” (_op_. _cit_., p. 100).

Exactly! While firmly rejecting materialism, and even the slightest
concession to materialism, Schulze, the follower of Hume, described in
1792 the relation between the question of space and time and the
question of an objective reality out-side us just as the materialist
Engels described it in 1894 (the last preface to _Anti-Dühring_ is dated
May 23,1894). This does not mean that during these hundred years our
ideas of time and space have undergone no change, or that a vast amount
of new material has not been gathered on the _development_ of these
ideas (material to which both Voroshilov-Chernov and
Voroshilov-Valentinov refer as supposedly refuting Engels). This does
mean that the _relation between_ materialism and agnosticism, as the
fundamental lines in philosophy, could not have changed, in spite of all
the “new” names paraded by our Machians.

And Bogdanov too contributes absolutely nothing but “new” names to the
old philosophy of idealism and agnosticism. When he repeats the
arguments of Hering and Mach on the difference between physiological and
geometrical space, or between perceptual and abstract space
(_Empirio-Monism_, Bk. I, p. 26), he is fully repeating the mistake of
Dühring. It is one thing, how, with the help of various sensc organs,
man perceives space, and how, in the course of a long historical
development, abstract ideas of space are derived from these perceptions;
it is an entirely different thing whether there is an objective reality
independent of mankind which corresponds to these perceptions and
conceptions of mankind. This latter question, although it is the only
philosophical question, Bogdanov “did not notice” beneath the mass of
detailed investigations on the former question, and he was therefore
unable clearly to distinguish between Engels’ materialism and Mach’s
confusion.

Time, like space, is “a form of social co-ordination of the experiences
of different people,” their “objectivity” lies in their “general
significance” (_ibid_., p. 34).

This is absolutely false. Religion also has general significance as
expressing the social co-ordination of the experience of the larger
section of humanity. But there is no objective reality that corresponds
  to the teachings of religion, for example, on the past of the earth
and the creation of the world. There _is_ an objective reality that
_corresponds_ to the teaching of science (although it is as relative at
every stage in the development of science as every stage in the
development of religion is relative) that the earth existed _prior to_
any society, _prior to_ man, _prior to_ organic matter, and that it bas
existed for a _definite_ time and in a _definite_ space in relation to
the other planets. According to Bogdanov, various forms of space and
time adapt themselves to man’s experience and his perceptive faculty. As
a matter of fact, just the reverse is true: our “experience” and our
perception adapt themselves more and more to _objective_ space and time,
and _reflect_ them ever more correctly and profoundly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] Anton von Leclair, _Der Realismus der modernen Naturwissenschaft im
Lichte der von Berkeley und Kant angebahnten Erkenntniskritik_ [_The
Realism of Modern Science in the Light of Berkeley’s and Kant’s Critique
of Knowledge_], Prag, 1879. —_Lenin_

[2] _Natural Science_,^([6]) Vol. I, 1892, p. 300. —_Lenin_

[3] J. M. Bentley, _The Philosophical Review_,^([7]) Vol. VI, 5, Sept.
1897, p. 523. —_Lenin_

[4] R. J. Ryle, _Natural Science_, Aug. 1892, p. 454.] —_Lenin_

[5] See F. Engels, _Anti-Duhring,_ Moscov.’, 1959, pp. 76.

[6] _Natural Science_—a monthly journal published in London from 1892 to
1899.

[7] The Philosophical Review—an American journal of an idealist
tendency, founded by Jacob Gould Schurman. It began publication in 1892.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 6. FREEDOM AND NECESSITY


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Three: The Theory of Knowledge of Dialectical Materialism and of Empirio-Criticism. III )

6. Freedom and Necessity

On pages 140–41 of the _Studies_, A. Lunacharsky quotes the argument
given by Engels in _Anti-Dühring_ on this question and fully endorses
the “remarkably precise and apt” statement of the problem made by Engels
in that “wonderful page”^([1]) of the work mentioned.

There is, indeed, much that is wonderful here. And even more “wonderful”
is the fact that neither Lunacharsky, nor the whole crowd of other
Machian would-be Marxists, “noticed” the epistemological significance of
Engels’ discussion of freedom and necessity. They read it and they
copied it, but they did not make head or tail of it.

Engels says: “Hegel was the first to state correctly the relation
between freedom and necessity. To him, freedom is the appreciation of
necessity. ‘Necessity is _blind_ only _in so far as it is not
understood_.’ Freedom does not consist in the dream of independence from
natural laws, but in the knowledge of these laws, and in the possibility
this gives of systematically making them work towards definite ends.
This holds good in relation both to the laws of external nature and to
those which govern the bodily and mental existence of men themselves—two
classes of laws which we can separate from each other at most only in
thought but   not in reality. Freedom of the will therefore means
nothing but the capacity to make decisions with knowledge of the
subject. Therefore the _freer_ a man’s judgment is in relation to a
definite question, the greater is the _necessity_ with which the content
of this judgment will be determined. . . . Freedom therefore consists in
the control over ourselves and over external nature, a control founded
on knowledge of natural necessity (_Naturnotwendigkeiten_).” (5th Germ.
ed., pp. 112–13.)[8]

Let us examine the epistemological premises upon which this argument is
based.

Firstly, Engels at the very outset of his argument recognises laws of
nature, laws of external nature, the necessity of nature—_i.e._., all
that Mach, Avenarius, Petzoldt and Co. characterise as “metaphysics.” If
Lunacharsky had really wanted to reflect on Engels’ “wonderful” argument
he could not have helped noticing the fundamental difference between the
materialist theory of knowledge and agnosticism and idealism, which deny
law in nature or declare it to be only “logical,” etc., etc.

Secondly, Engels does not attempt to contrive “definitions” of freedom
and necessity, the kind of scholastic definition with which the
reactionary professors (like Avenarius) and their disciples (like
Bogdanov) are most concerned. Engels takes the knowledge and will of
man, on the one hand, and the necessity of nature, on the other, and
instead of giving definitions, simply says that the necessity of nature
is primary, and human will and mind secondary. The latter must
necessarily and inevitably adapt themselves to the former. Engels
regards this as so obvious that he does not waste words explaining his
view. It needs the Russian Machians to _complain_ of _Engels’_ general
definition of materialism (that nature is primary and mind secondary;
remember Bogdanov’s “perplexity” on this point!), and at the same time
to regard _one of the particular applications_ by Engels of this general
and fundamental definition as “wonderful” and “remarkably apt"!

Thirdly, Engels does not doubt the existence of “blind necessity.” He
admits the existence of a necessity _unknown_ to man. This is quite
obvious from the passage just quoted. But how, from the standpoint of
the Machians, can man _know_   of the existence of what he _does not
know_? Is it not “mysticism,” “metaphysics,” the admission of “fetishes”
and “idols,” is it not the “Kantian unknowable thing-in-itself” to say
that we know of the existence of an unknown necessity? Had the Machians
given the matter any thought they could not have failed to observe the
_complete identity_ between Engels’ argument on the knowability of the
objective nature of things and on the transformation of
“things-in-themselves” into “things-for-us,” on the one hand, and his
argument on a blind, unknown necessity, on the other. The development of
con-sciousness in each human individual and the development of the
collective knowledge of humanity at large presents us at every step with
examples of the transformation of the unknown “thing-in-itself” into the
known “thing-for-us,” of the transformation of blind, unknown necessity,
“necessity-in-itself,” into the known “necessity-for-us.”
Epistemologically, there is no difference whatever between these two
transformations, for the basic point of view in both cases is the same,
_viz_., materialistic, the recognition of the objective reality of the
external world and of the laws of external nature, and of the fact that
this world and these laws are fully knowable to man but can never be
known to him with _finality_. We do not know the necessity of nature in
the phenomena of the weather, and to that extent we are inevitably
slaves of the weather. But while _we do not know_ this necessity, _we do
know_ that it exists. Whence this knowledge? From the very source whence
comes the knowledge that things exist outside our mind and independently
of it, namely, from the development of our knowledge, which provides
millions of examples to every individual of knowledge replacing
ignorance when an object acts upon our sense-organs, and conversely of
ignorance replacing knowledge when the possibility of such action is
eliminated.

Fourthly, in the above-mentioned argument Engels plainly employs the
_salto vitale_ method in philosophy, that is to say, he makes a _leap_
from theory to practice. Not a single one of the learned (and stupid)
professors of philosophy, in whose footsteps our Machians follow, would
permit himself to make such a leap, for this would be a disgraceful
thing for a devotee of “pure science” to do. For them the   theory of
knowledge, which demands the cunning concoction of “definitions,” is one
thing, while practice is another. For Engels all living human practice
permeates the theory of knowledge itself and provides an _objective_
criterion of truth. For until we know a law of nature, it, existing and
acting independently and outside our mind, makes us slaves of “blind
necessity.” But once we come to know this law, which acts (as Marx
pointed out a thousand times) _independently_ of our will and our mind,
we become the masters of nature. The mastery of nature manifested in
human practice is a result of an objectively correct reflection within
the human head of the phenomena and processes of nature, and is proof of
the fact that this reflection (within the limits of what is revealed by
practice) is objective, absolute, and eternal truth.

What is the result? Every step in Engels’ argument, literally almost
every phrase, every proposition, is constructed entirely and exclusively
upon the epistemology of dialectical materialism, upon premises which
stand out in striking contrast to the Machian nonsense about bodies
being complexes of sensations, about “elements,” “the coincidence of
sense-perceptions with the reality that exists outside us,” etc., etc.,
etc. Without being the least deterred by this, the Machians abandon
materialism and repeat (_à la_ Berman) the vulgar banalities about
dialectics, and at the same time welcome with open arms _one_ of the
applications of dialectical materialism! They have taken their
philosophy from an eclectic pauper’s broth and are continuing to offer
this hotchpotch to the reader. They take a bit of agnosticism and a
morsel of idealism from Mach, add to it slices of dialectical
materialism from Marx, and call this hash a _development_ of Marxism.
They imagine that if Mach, Avenarius, Petzoldt, and all the authorities
of theirs have not the slightest inkling of how Hegel and Marx solved
the problem (of freedom and necessity), this is purely acci-dental: why,
it was simply because they overlooked a certain page in a certain book,
and not because these “authorities” were and are utter ignoramuses on
the subject of the _real_ progress made by philosophy in the nineteenth
century and because they were and are philosophical obscurantists.

Here is the argument of one such obscurantist, the philosophy
professor-in-ordinary at the University of Vienna, Ernst Mach:

“The correctness of the position of determinism or indeterminism cannot
be demonstrated. Only a perfect science or a provedly impossible science
could decide this question. It is a matter of the presuppositions which
we bring (_man heranbringt_) to the consideration of things, depending
upon whether we ascribe to previous successes or failures of the
investigation a greater or lesser subjective weight (_subjektives
Gewicht_). But during the investigation every thinker is of necessity a
theoretical determinist” (_Knowledge and Error_, 2nd Germ. ed., pp.
282-83).

Is this not obscurantism, when pure theory is carefully partitioned off
from practice; when determinism is confined to the field of
“investigation,” while in the field of morality, social activity, and
all fields other than “investigation” the question is left to a
“subjective” estimate? In my workroom, says the learned pedant, I am a
determinist; but that the philosopher should seek to obtain an integral
conception of the world based on determinism, embracing both theory and
practice—of that there is no mention. Mach utters banalities because on
the theoretical problem of freedom and necessity he is entirely at sea.

“. . . Every new discovery discloses the defects of our knowledge,
reveals a residue of dependencies hitherto un-heeded. . .” (p. 283).
Excellent! And is this “residue” the “thing-in-itself,” which our
knowledge reflects ever more deeply? Not at all: “. . . Thus, he also
who in theory defends extreme determinism, must nevertheless in practice
remain an indeterminist. . .” (p. 283). And so things have been amicably
divided^([2]) : theory for the professors, practice for the theologians!
Or, objectivism (_i.e._., “shamefaced” materialism) in theory and the
“subjective method in sociology”^([9]) in practice. No wonder the
Russian ideologists of philistinism, the Narodniks, from Lessevich to
Chernov, sympathise with this banal philosophy. But it is very sad that
would-be Marxists   have been captivated by such nonsense and are
embarrassedly covering up the more absurd of Mach’s conclusions.

But on the question of the will Mach is not content with confusion and
half-hearted agnosticism: he goes much further. “. . . Our sensation of
hunger,” we read in the _Mechenik_, “is not so essentially different
from the affinity of sulphuric acid for zinc, and our will is not so
very different from the pressure of the stone on its support. . . . We
shall thus find ourselves [that is, if we hold such a view] nearer to
nature without it being necessary to resolve ourselves into an
incomprehensible nebula of atoms, or to resolve nature into a system of
phantoms” (French trans., p. 434). Thus there is no need for materialism
(“nebula of atoms” or electrons, _i.e._., the recognition of the
objective reality of the material world), there is no need for an
idealism which would recognise the world as “the otherness” of spirit;
but there is a possible idealism which recognises the world as _will_!
We are superior not only to materialism, but also to the idealism of a
Hegel; but we are not averse to coquetting with an idealism like
Schopenhauer’s! Our Machians, who assume an air of injured innocence at
every reminder of Mach’s kinship to philosophical idealism, preferred to
keep silent on this delicate question too. Yet it is difficult to find
in philosophical writings an exposition of Mach’s views which does not
mention his tendency towards _Willensmetaphysik_, _i.e._., voluntaristic
idealism. This was pointed out by J. Baumann,^([3]) and in replying to
him the Machian Kleinpeter does not take exception to this point, but
declares that Mach is, of course, “nearer to Kant and Berkeley than to
the metaphysical empiricism prevailing in science” (_i.e._., instinctive
materialism; _ibid_., Bd. 6, S. 87). This is also pointed out by E.
Becher, who remarks that if Mach in some places advocates voluntaristic
metaphysics, and in others renounces it, it only testifies to the
arbitrariness of his terminology; in fact, Mach’s kinship to voluntarist
metaphysics is beyond doubt.^([4]) Even Lucka admits   the admixture of
this metaphysics (_i.e._., idealism) to “phenomenalism” (_i.e._.,
agnosticism).[5] W. Wundt also points this out.^([6]) That Mach is a
phenomenalist who is “not averse to voluntaristic idealism” is attested
also in Ueberweg-Heinze’s textbook on the history of modern
philosophy.^([7])

In short, Mach’s eclecticism and his tendency to idealism are clear to
everyone except perhaps the Russian Machians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

Notes

[1] THIS FOOTNOTE has been moved into BODY OF DOCUMENT.

[2] Mach in the _Mechanik_ says: “Religious opinions are people’s
_strictly private affair_ as long as they do not obtrude them on others
and do not apply them to things which belong to another sphere” (French
trans., p. 434). —_Lenin_

[3] _Archiv für systemetische Philosophie_, 1898, II, Bd, IV, S. 63,
article on Mach’s philosophical views. —_Lenin_

[4] Erich Becher, “The Philosophical Views of Ernst Mach,” _The
Philosophical Review_, Vol. XIV, 5, 1905, pp. 536, 546, 547, 548.
—_Lenin_

[5] E. Lucka, “_Das Erkenntnisproblem und Machs ‘Analyse der
Empfindungen_’” [_The Problem of Knowledge and Mach’s_ “_Analysis of
Sensations_"], in _Kantstudien_, Bd. VIII, 1903, S. 400. —_Lenin_

[6] _Systematische Philosophie_ [_Systeznatic Philosophy_], Leipzig,
1907, S. 131. —_Lenin_

[7] _Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie_ [_Outline of the History
of Philosophy_], Bd. IV, 9. Aufl., Berlin, 1903, S. 250. —_Lenin_

[10] Instead of the words “provokes not a smile, but disgust”, the first
edition of the book had “provokes more than a smile”. After he had read
the proofs Lenin asked A. I. Ulyanova-Yelizarova to alter the phrase in
the text or indicate this in the errata. Lenin ’s correction was printed
in a list of errata appended to the first edition.

[8] See F, Engels, _Anti-Duhring,_ Moscow, 1959, p. 157.

[9] “_The subjective method in sociology—an_ anti-scientific idealist
approach to historical processes which refuses to acknowledge objective
laws of social development, reducing them to the arbitrary actions of
“outstanding personalities”. In the thirties and forties of the
nineteenth century, adherents of the subjectivist school in sociology
were the Young 1-legelians Bruno Bacer, David Strauss, Max Sthner and
others who declared the people to be an “uncritical mass” that follows
“critically thinking personalities”. K. Marx and F. Engels in the _Holy
Family,_ the _Cernoors Ideology_ and other works made a thorough and
profound criticism of the views of the Young Hegelians. In Flussia in
the second half of the nineteenth century re resentatives of the
subjective method in sociology were the liberal&frac14; Narodniks (P. L.
Layroy, N. K. Mikhailovshy and others), who denied the objective nature
of the laws of social development and reduced history to the actions of
individual heroes, ’outstanding personalities ".

Marxism-Leninism exposed the fallacy of the subjective-idealist trend in
sociology and created’ a genuinely scientific, integral theory of social
development, of the decisive part played by the masses in history and of
the significance of the activities of individuals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 1. THE CRITICISM OF KANTIANISM FROM THE LEFT AND FROM THE RIGHT


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

Chapter Four: The Philosophical Idealists as Comrades-In-Arms and Successors of Empirio-Criticism

So far we have examined empirio-criticism taken by itself. We must now
examine it in its historical development and in its connection and
relation with other philosophical trends. First comes the question of
the relation of Mach and Avenarius to Kant.

1. The Criticism of Kantianism from the Left and From the Right

Both Mach and Avenarius began their philosophical careers in the
seventies, when the fashionable cry in German professorial circles was
“Back to Kant” And, indeed, both founders of empirio-criticism in their
philosophical development started from Kant. “His [Kant’s] critical
idealism,” says Mach, “was, as I acknowledge with the deepest gratitude,
the starting point of all my critical thought. But I found it impossible
to remain faithful to it. Very soon I began to return to the views of
Berkeley . . . [and then] arrived at views akin to those of Hume. . . .
And even today I cannot help regarding Berkeley and Hume as far more
consistent thinkers than Kant” _(Analysis of Sensations,_ p. 292).

Thus Mach quite definitely admits that having begun with Kant he soon
followed the line of Berkeley and Hume. Let us turn to Avenarius.

In his _Prolegomena to a_ “_Critique of Pure Experience_” (1876),
Avenarius already in the foreword states that the words _Kritik der
reinen Erfahrung (Critique of Pure Experience)_ are indicative of his
attitude towards Kant’s “Critique of Pure Reason,” and “of course, of an
antagonistic attitude” towards Kant (1876 ed., p. iv). In what does
Avenarius’ antagonism to Kant consist? In the fact that Kant, in
Avenarius’ opinion, had not sufficiently “purified experience.” It is
with this “purification of experience” that Avenarius deals in his
_Prolegomena_ (§§ 56, 72 and many other places). Of what does Avenarius
“purify” the Kantian doctrine of experience? In the first place, of
apriorism. In § 56 he says: “The question as to whether the superfluous
‘_a priori_ conceptions of reason’ should and could be eliminated from
the content of experience and thereby _pure experience par excellence_
established is, as far as I know, raised here, as such, for the first
time.” We have already seen that Avenarius in this way “purified”
Kantianism of the recognition of necessity and causality.

Secondly, he purifies Kantianism of the assumption of substance (§ 95),
i.e.,_the thing-in-itself,_ which, in Avenarius’ opinion “is not given
in the stuff of actual experience but is imported into it by thought.”

We shall presently see that Avenarius’ definition of his philosophical
line entirely coincides with that of Mach, differing only in pompousness
of formulation. But we must first note that Avenarius is telling a
_plain untruth_ when he asserts that it was he who in 1876 _for the
first time_ raised the question of “purifying experience,” _i.e.,_ of
purifying the Kantian doctrine of apriorism and the assumption of the
thing-in-itself. As a matter of fact, the development of German
classical philosophy immediately after Kant gave rise to a criticism of
Kantianism exactly _along the very line_ followed by Avenarius. This
line is represented in German classical philosophy by
Schulze-Aenesidemus, an adherent of Humean agnosticism, and by J. G.
Fichte, an adherent of Berkeleianism, _i.e.,_ of subjective idealism. In
1792 Schulze-Aenesidemus criticised Kant for _this very_ recognition of
apriorism (op. cit., pp. 56,141, etc.) and of the thing-in-itself. We
sceptics, or followers of Hume, says Schulze, reject the thing-in-itself
as being “beyond the bounds of all experience” (p. 57). We reject
_objective knowledge_ (p. 25);   we deny that space and time really
exist outside us (p. 100); we reject the presence in our experience of
necessity (p. 112), causality, force, etc. (p. 113). One cannot
attribute to them any “reality outside our conceptions” (p. 114). Kant
proves apriority “dogmatically,” saying that since we cannot think
otherwise there is therefore an _a priori_ law of thought. “This
argument,” Schulze replies to Kant, “has long been utilised in
philosophy to prove the objective nature of what lies outside our ideas”
(p. 141), Arguing thus, we may attribute causality to things
in-themselves (p. 142). “Experience never tells us _(wir erfahren
niemals)_ that the action on us of objective things produces ideas,” and
Kant by no means proved that “this something (which lies outside our
reason) must be regarded as a thing in-itself, distinct from our
sensation _(Gemut)_. But sensation also may be thought of as the _sole_
basis of all our knowledge” (p. 265). The Kantian critique of pure
reason “bases its argument on the proposition that every act of
cognition begins with the action of objective things on our organs of
sensation _(Gemüt),_ but it then disputes the truth and reality of this
proposition” (p. 266). Kant in no way refuted the idealist Berkeley (pp.
268-72).

It is evident from this that the Humean Schulze rejects Kant’s doctrine
of the thing-in-itself as an inconsistent concession to materialism,
_i.e.,_to the “dogmatic” assertion that in our sensations we are given
objective reality, or, in other words, that our ideas are caused by the
action of objective things (independent of our mind) on our
sense-organs. The agnostic Schulze reproaches the agnostic Kant on the
grounds that the latter’s assumption of the thing-in-itself contradicts
agnosticism and leads to materialism. In the same way, but even more
vigorously, Kant is criticised by the subjective idealist Fichte, who
maintains that Kant’s assumption of the thing-in-itself independent of
the _self_ is “_realism_” _(Werke,_ I, S. 483), and that Kant makes “no
clear” distinction between “realism” and “idealism.” Fichte sees a
crying inconsistency in the assumption of Kant and the Kantians that the
thing-in-itself is the “basis of objective reality” (p. 480), for this
is in contradiction to critical idealism. “With you,” exclaims Fichte,
addressing the realist expositors of Kant, “the earth rests on the  
great elephant, and the great elephant rests on the earth. Your
thing-in-itself, which is only thought, acts on the _self_!” ( p. 483).

Thus Avenarius was profoundly mistaken in imagining that he “for the
first time” undertook a “purification of the experience” of Kant from
apriorism and from the thing-in-itself and that he was thereby giving
rise to a “new” trend in philosophy. In reality he was continuing the
_old_ line of Hume and Berkeley, Schulze-Aenesidemus and J. G. Fichte.
Avenarius imagined that he was “purifying experience” in general. In
reality he was only _purifying agnosticism of Kantianism_. He fought not
against the agnosticism of Kant (agnosticism is a denial of objective
reality given in sensation), but for a _purer agnosticism,_ for the
elimination of Kant’s assumption, which is contradictory to agnosticism,
that there is a thing-in itself, albeit unknowable, noumenal and
other-sided, that there is necessity and causality, albeit _a priori,_
given in our understanding, and not in objective reality. He fought Kant
not from the _Left,_ as the materialists fought Kant, but from the
_Right,_ as the sceptics and idealists fought Kant. He imagined that he
was advancing, when in reality he was retreating to the programme of
criticising Kant which Kuno Fischer, speaking of Schulze-Aenesidemus,
aptly characterised in the following words: “The critique of pure reason
with pure reason [_i.e._, apriorism] left out is scepticism. The
critique of pure reason with the thing-in-itself left out is Berkeleian
idealism” _(History of Modern Philosophy,_ German ed., 1869, Vol. V, p.
115).

This brings us to one of the most curious episodes in our whole
“Machiad,” in the whole campaign of the Russian Machians against Engels
and Marx. The latest discovery by Bogdanov and Bazarov, Yushkevich and
Valentinov, trumpeted by them in a thousand different keys, is that
Plekhanov is making a “luckless attempt to reconcile Engels with Kant by
the aid of a compromise—a thing-in-itself which is just a wee bit
knowable” _(Studies,_ _etc_., p. 67 and many other places). This
discovery of our Machians discloses a veritable bottomless pit of utter
confusion and monstrous misunderstanding both of Kant and of the whole
course of development of German classical philosophy.

The principal feature of Kant’s philosophy is the reconciliation of
materialism with idealism, a compromise between the two, the combination
within one system of heterogeneous and contrary philosophical trends.
When Kant assumes that something outside us, a thing-in-itself,
corresponds to our ideas, he is a materialist. When he declares this
thing-in-itself to be unknowable, transcendental, other-sided, he is an
idealist. Recognising experience, sensations, as the only source of our
knowledge, Kant is directing his philosophy towards sensationalism, and
_via_ sensationalism, under certain conditions, towards materialism.
Recognising the apriority of space, time, causality, etc., Kant is
directing his philosophy towards idealism. Both consistent materialists
and consistent idealists (as well as the “pure” agnostics, the Humeans)
have mercilessly criticised Kant for this inconsistency. The
materialists blamed Kant for his idealism, rejected the idealist
features of his system, demonstrated the knowability, the this-sidedness
of the thing-in-itself, the absence of a fundamental difference between
the thing-in-itself and the phenomenon, the need of deducing causality,
etc., not from _a priori_ laws of thought, but from objective reality.
The agnostics and idealists blamed Kant for his assumption of the
thing-in-itself as a concession to materialism, “realism” or “naïve
realism”. The agnostics, moreover, rejected not only the
thing-in-itself, but apriorism as well; while the idealists demanded the
consistent deduction from pure thought not only of the _a priori_ forms
of perception, but of the world as a whole (by magnifying human thought
to an abstract _Self,_ or to an “Absolute Idea”, or to a “Universal
_Will_” etc., etc.). And here our Machists, “without noticing” that they
have taken as their teachers people who had criticised Kant from the
standpoint of scepticism and idealsim, began to rend their cloathes and
to cover their heads with ashes at the sight of monstrous people who
criticised Kant from a _diametrically opposite point of view,_ who
rejected the slightest element of agnosticism (scepticism) and idealism
in his system, who demonstrated that the thing-in-itself is objectively
real, fully knowable and this-sided, that it does not differ
fundamentally from appearance, that it becomes transformed into
appearance at every step in the   development of the individual
consciouness of man and the collective consciousness of mankind.
Help!—they cried— this is an illegitimate mixture of materialism and
Kantianism!

When I read the assurances of our Machists that they criticise Kant for
more consistently and thoroughly than any of the antiquated
materialists, it always seems to me as though Purishkevich^([1]) had
joined our company and was shouting: I criticised the
Constitutional-Democrats^([4]) far more consistently and thoroughly than
you Marxist gentlemen! There is no question about it, Mr. Purishkevich,
politically consistent people can and always will criticise the
Constitutional-Democrats from diametrically opposite points of view, but
after all it must not be forgotten that you criticised the
Constitutional-Democrats for being _excessively_ democratic, while we
criticised them for being _insufficiently_ democratic! The Machians
criticise Kant for being too much of a materialist, while we criticise
him for not being enough of a materialist. The Machians criticise Kant
from the Right, we from the Left.

The Humean Schulze and the subjective idealist Fichte may be taken as
examples of the former category of critics in the history of classical
German philosophy. As we have already seen, they try to obliterate the
“realistic” elements of Kantianism. Just as Schulze and Fichte
criticised Kant himself, so the Humean empirio-criticists and the
subjective idealist-immanentists criticised the German Neo-Kantians of
the second half of the nineteenth century. The line of Hume and Berkeley
reappeared in a slightly renovated verbal garb. Mach and Avenarius
reproached Kant not because his treatment of the thing-in-itself was not
sufficiently realistic, not sufficiently materialistic, but because he
_assumed_ its existence; not because he refused to deduce causality and
necessity in nature from objective reality, but because he assumed
causality and necessity at all (except perhaps purely “logical”
necessity). The immanentists were at one with the empirio-criticists,
also criticising Kant from the Humean and Berkeleian standpoint. For
instance, Leclair in 1879, in the work in which he praised Mach as a
remarkable philosopher, reproached Kant for his “inconsistency and
connivance at realism” as expressed in the concept of the
“_thing-in-itself_”—that   “nominal residuum of vulgar realism” _(Der
Realismus der modernen Naturwissenschaft,_ _usw_., S. 9). Leclair calls
materialism “vulgar realism”—in order “to make it stronger.” “In our
opinion,” writes Leclair, “all those parts of the Kantian theory which
gravitate towards _realismus vulgaris_ should be vanquished and
eliminated as being inconsistencies and bastard _(zwitterhaft)_ products
from the idealist point of view” (p. 41). “The inconsistencies and
contradictions in the Kantian theory of knowledge [arise from] the
amalgamation _(Verquickung)_ of idealist criticism with still
unvanquished remnants of realistic dogmatism” (p. 170). By realistic
dogmatism Leclair means materialism.

Another immanentist, Johannes Rehmke, reproached Kant because he
_realistically walled himself off_ from Berkeley with the
thing-in-itself (Johannes Rehmke, _Die Welt als Wahrnehmung und
Begriff,_ Berlin, 1880, S. 9). “The philosophical activity of Kant bore
an essentially polemical character: with the thing-in-itself he turned
against German rationalism [_i.e._, the old fideism of the eighteenth
century], and with pure contemplation against English empiricism” (p.
25). “I would compare the Kantian thing-in-itself with a movable lid
placed over a pit: the thing looks so innocent and safe; one steps on it
and suddenly falls into . . . the ‘_world-in-itself_’” (p. 27). That is
why Kant is not liked by the associates of Mach and Avenarius, the
immanentists; they do not like him because in some respects he
approaches the “pit” of materialism!

And here are some examples of the criticism of Kant from the Left.
Feuerbach reproaches Kant not for his “realism,” but for his _idealism,_
and describes his system as “idealism based on empiricism” _(Werke,_ II,
296).

Here is a particularly important remark on Kant by Feuerbach. “Kant
says: If we regard—as we should—the objects of our perceptions as mere
appearances, we thereby admit that at the bottom of appearances is a
thing-in-itself, although we do not know how it is actually constructed,
but only know its appearance, _i.e.,_the manner in which our senses are
affected _(affiziert)_ by this unknown something. Hence, our reason, by
the very fact that it accepts appearances, also admits the existence of
things-in-themselves;   and to that extent we can say that to entertain
an idea of such entities which lie at the bottom of appearances, and
consequently are but thought entities, is not only permissible, but
unavoidable. . . .” Having selected a passage from Kant where the
thing-in-itself is regarded merely as a mental thing, a thought entity,
and not a real thing, Feuerbach directs his whole criticism against it.
“. . . Therefore,” he says, “the objects of the senses [the objects of
experience] are for the mind only appearances, and not truth. . . . Yet
the thought entities are not actual objects for the mind! The Kantian
philosophy is a contradiction between subject and object, between entity
and existence, thinking and being. Entity is left to the mind, existence
to the senses. Existence without entity [_i.e._, the existence of
appearances without objective reality] is mere appearance—the sensible
things—while entity without existence is mere thought—the thought
entities, the noumena; they are thought of, but they lack existence—at
least for us—and objectivity; they are the things-in-themselves, the
true things, but they are not real things. . . . But what a
contradiction, to sever truth from reality, reality from truth!”
_(Werke,_ II, S. 302-03). Feuerbach reproaches Kant not because he
assumes things-in-themselves, but because he does not grant them
reality, _i.e.,_objective reality, because he regards them as mere
thought, “thought entities,” and not as “entities possessing existence,”
_i.e.,_real and actually existing. Feuerbach rebukes Kant for deviating
from materialism.

“The Kantian philosophy is a contradiction,” Feuerbach wrote to Bolin on
March 26, 1858, “it inevitably leads either to Fichtean idealism or to
sensationalism.” The former conclusion “belongs to the past,” the latter
“to the present and the future” (Grün, _op_. _cit_., II, 49). We have
already seen that Feuerbach advocates objective sensationalism,
_i.e.,_materialism. The new turn from Kant to agnosticism and idealism,
to Hume and Berkeley, is undoubtedly _reactionary,_ even from
Feuerbach’s standpoint. And his ardent follower, Albrecht Rau, who
together with the merits of Feuerbach also adopted his faults, which
were eliminated by Marx and Engels, criticised Kant wholly in the spirit
of his teacher: “The Kantian philosophy is an amphibole [ambiguity]; it
is both materialism and idealism, and the key   to its essence lies in
its dual nature. As a materialist or an empiricist, Kant cannot help
conceding things an existence _(Wesenheit)_ outside us. But as an
idealist he could not rid himself of the prejudice that the soul is an
entity totally different from sensible things. Hence there are real
things and a human mind which apprehends those things. But how can the
mind approach things totally different from itself? The way out adopted
by Kant is as follows: the mind possesses certain _a priori_ knowledge,
in virtue of which things must appear to it as they do. Hence, the fact
that we understand things as we do is a fact of our creation. For the
mind which lives within us is nothing but the divine mind, and just as
God created the world out of nothing, so the human mind creates out of
things something which they are not in themselves. Thus Kant guarantees
real things their existence as ‘things-in-themselves.’ Kant, however,
needed the soul, because immortality was for him a moral postulate. The
‘thing-in-itself,’ gentle men [says Rau, addressing the Neo-Kantians in
general and the muddleheaded A. Lange in particular, who falsified the
_History of Materialism],_ is what separates the idealism of Kant from
the idealism of Berkeley; it spans the gap between materialism and
idealism. Such is my criticism of the Kantian philosophy, and let those
who can refute it. . . .” “For the materialist a distinction between _a
priori_ knowledge and the ‘thing-in-itself’ is absolutely superfluous,
for since he nowhere breaks the continuity of nature, since he does not
regard matter and mind as two fundamentally different things, but as two
aspects of one and the same thing, he need not resort to artifice in
order to bring the mind and the thing into conjunction.”[2]

Further, Engels as we have seen, rebuked Kant for being an agnostic, but
not for his deviation from consistent agnosticism. Lafargue, Engels’
disciple, argued in 1900 against the Kantians (amongst whom at that time
was Charles Rappoport) as follows:

“. . . At the beginning of the nineteenth century our bourgeoisie,  
having completed its task of revolutionary destruction, began to
repudiate its Voltairean and free-thinking philosophy. Catholicism,
which the master decorator Chateaubriand painted in romantic colours
_(peinturlurait),_ was restored to fashion, and Sebastian Mercier
imported the idealism of Kant in order to give the _coup de grâce_ to
the materialism of the Encyclopaedists, whose protagonists had been
guillotined by Robespierre.

“At the end of the nineteenth century, which will go down in history as
the ‘bourgeois century,’ the intellectuals attempted to crush the
materialism of Marx and Engels beneath the philosophy of Kant. The
reactionary movement started in Germany—without offence to the socialist
_integralistes_ who would like to ascribe the honour to their chief,
Malon. But Malon himself had been to the school of Höchberg, Bernstein
and the other disciples of Dühring, who were reforming Marxism in
Zurich. [Lafargue is referring to the ideological movement in German
socialism in the later seventies.^([5])] It is to be expected that
Jaurès, Fournière and our other intellectuals will also treat us to Kant
as soon as they have mastered his terminology. . . . Rappoport is
mistaken when he assures us that for Marx the ‘ideal and the real are
identical.’ In the first place we never employ such metaphysical
phraseology. An idea is as real as the object of which it is the
reflection in the brain. . . . To provide a little recreation for the
comrades who have to acquaint themselves with bourgeois philosophy, I
shall explain the substance of this famous problem which has so much
exercised spiritualist minds.

“The workingman who eats sausage and receives a hundred sous a day knows
very well that he is robbed by the employer and is nourished by pork
meat, that the employer is a robber and that the sausage is pleasant to
the taste and nourishing to the body. Not at all, say the bourgeois
sophists, whether they are called Pyrrho, Hume or Kant. His opinion is
personal, an entirely subjective opinion; he might with equal reason
maintain that the employer is his benefactor and that the sausage
consists of chopped leather, for he cannot know _things-in-themselves_.

“The question is not properly put, that is the whole trouble. . . . In
order to know an object, man must first verify   whether his senses
deceive him or not. . . . The chemists have gone still further—they have
penetrated into bodies, they have analysed them, decomposed them into
their elements, and then performed the reverse procedure, they have
recomposed them from their elements. And from the moment that man is
able to produce things for his own use from these elements, he may, as
Engels says, assert that he knows _the things-in-themselves_. The God of
the Christians, if he existed and if he created the world, could do no
more.”[3]

We have taken the liberty of making this long quotation in order to show
how Lafargue understood Engels and how he criticised Kant from the Left,
not for those aspects of Kantianism which distinguish it from Humism,
but for those which are common to both Kant and Hume; not for his
assumption of the thing-in-itself, but for his inadequately materialist
view of it.

And lastly, Karl Kautsky in his _Ethics_ also criticises Kant from a
standpoint diametrically opposed to that of Hume and Berkeley. “That I
see green, red and white,” he writes, arguing against Kant’s
epistemology, “is grounded in my faculty of sight. But that green is
something different from red testifies to something that lies outside of
me, to real differences between the things. . . . The relations and
differences between the things themselves revealed to me by the
individual space and time concepts . . . are real relations and
differences of the external world, not conditioned by the nature of my
perceptive faculty. . . . If this were really so [if Kant’s doctrine of
the ideality of time and space were true], we could know nothing about
the world outside us, not even that it exists.” (Russian Translation,
pp. 33-34.)

Thus the _entire school_ of Feuerbach, Marx and Engels turned from Kant
to the Left, to a complete rejection of all idealism and of all
agnosticism. But our Machians followed the _reactionary_ trend in
philosophy, Mach and Avenarius, who criticised Kant from the standpoint
of Hume and Berkeley. Of course, it is the sacred right of every
citizen, and particularly of every intellectual, to follow any
ideological   reactionary he likes. But when people who have radically
severed relations with the very _foundations of Marxism_ in philosophy
begin to dodge, confuse matters, hedge and assure us that they “too” are
Marxists in philosophy, that they are “almost” in agreement with Marx,
and have only slightly “supplemented” him—the spectacle is a far from
pleasant one.

SEE: _Supplement to Chapter Four,_ _SECTION I_
From What Angle Did N. G. Chernyshevsky Criticise Kantianism?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] _Purishkevich, V. M._—a representative of the parties of the extreme
Right in the Duma, a big landlord and arch-reactionary. —_Lenin_

[2] Albrecht Rau, _Ludwig Feuerbachs Philosophie,_ _die Naturforschung
und die philosophische Kritik der Gegenwart [Ludwig Feuerbach’s
Philosophy,_ _Natural Science and the Modern Philosophical Critique_],
Leipzig, 1882, S. 87-89. —_Lenin_

[3] Paul Lafargue, “Le materialisme de Marx et l’idealisme de Kant”
[_Marx’s Materialism and Kant’s Idealism_], _Le Socialiste_,^([6])
February 25, 1900. —_Lenin_

[4] _Constitutional-Democrats_ (Cadets)——members of the
Constitutional—Democratic Party, the leading party of the
liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie in Russia. The Cadet Party was founded in
October 1905; it included representatives of the bourgeoisie, landlord
Zemstvo members and bourgeois intellectuals. Prominent lenders of the
Cadets were P. N. Milyukov, S. A. Muromtsev, V.A. Moklakov, A, I, Shin
garev, P. B. Struve, F. I. Bodichey and others. To deceive the working
people the Cadets falsely entitled themselves the “party of people’s
freedom”, but actually did not go beyond the demand for a constitutional
monarchy. The Cadets made the struggle against the revolutionary
movement their chief aim and endeavoured to share power with the tsar
and feudal landlords. During the First World War the Cadets actively
supported the annexationist foreign policy of the tsarist government.
During the February bourgeois-democratic revolution they tried to save
the monarchy. Occupying a leading position in the bourgeois Provisional
Government., the Cadets pursued an anti-popular, counter-revolutionary
policy convenient to the American-Anglo-French imperialists. After the
victory of the October Socialist Revolution the Cadets   came out as
irreconcilable enemies of Soviet power and took an active part in all
the armed actions of the counter-revolutionaries and the campaigns of
the interventionists. After the rout of the interventionists and
white-guards the Cadets became émigrés but did not cease their
anti-Soviet counter-revolutionary activity.

[5] This refers to the opportunist trend that developed within the
German Social-Democratic Party in the second half of the seventies of
the nineteenth century. Its chief ideologists were Karl Höchberg, Eduard
Bernstein and Karl August Schramm, who were influenced by Duhringism.
Bernstein and Louis Viereck, along with Johann Most and others, actively
helped to spread the eclectic views of Eugen Duhring among the German
Social-Democrats. Höchberg, who, as Marx expressed it, had “bought” his
way into the Party by his money, demanded that socialism should be made
a movement of “humanity in general” based on the “sense of justice” of
both the oppressed and the representatives of the “upper classes”.

In Berlin, Viereck took the initiative in forming the Mauritanian Club,
in which Dürhringism prevailed and which set itself the task of bringing
“educated people” to “socialism” and achieving class collaboration
between the workers and the bourgeoisie. After the promulgation of the
Anti-Socialist Law in Germany (1878), the leaders of the Mauritanian
Club migrated to Zurich where they continued their efforts to win over
the bourgeoisie to “socialism”.

The opportunist, anti-Marxist character of Höchberg’s group was clearly
shown in regard to the founding in Zurich of a central organ of the
German Social-Democratic Party. fl6chberg and his co-thinkers considered
that the newspaper should not carry out the revolutionary policy of the
Party but should limit itself to the abstract preaching of socialist
ideals. The Party leadership—August Bebel, Wilhelm Liebknecht and
others—in fact underestimated the opportunist danger by entrusting the
publication of the newspaper to the Zurich group.

In July 1879 the _.Jahrbuch für Sozialissenschaft und Social-politik
(Annals of Social Science end Social Politics),_ the journal edited by
Höchberg, published an article entitled “A Retrospective Review of the
Socialist Movement in Germany”, which discussed the revolutionary
tactics of the Party. The authors of the article—Höchberg, Schramm and
Bernstein—accused the Party of having provoked the Anti-Socialist Law by
its attacks on the bourgeoisie, and called for alliance with and
subordination to the bourgeoisie, on the grounds that the working class
was not able to emancipate itself by its own efforts. These opportunist,
reformist views evoked sharp protest from Marx and Engels, who rightly
regarded them as a betrayal of the Party, and in September 1879 they
came out with their famous “Circular Letter” (see K. Marx and F. Engels,
  _Selected Correspondence,_ Moscow, 1955, pp. 388-95). “The result of
Marx’s ‘furious’ attack,” wrote Lenin in describing the struggle of the
founders of Marxism against opportunism, “was that the opportunists
retreated and—tade themselves scarce. In a letter dated November 19,
1879, Marx announced that Höchberg had been removed from the editorial
committee and that all the influential leaders of the Party—Bebel,
Liebknecht, Bracke, etc.—had _repudiated_ his ideas” (present edition,
Vol. 12, p. 367).

Subsequently Hocbberg and Schramm left the workers’ movement, but
Bernstein, who temporarily refrained from advocating opportunism, became
one of the leaders of German Social-Democracy. The theoretical
confusion, however, and the opportunist position adopted by Bernstein at
the end of the seventies, were not accidental. After Engels’ death,
Bernstein openly came out with a revision of Marxism, putting forward
the opportunist slogan; “The movement is everything, the final goal is
nothing”, which was a further development of the basic propositions of
the 1879 article.

[6] _La Socialiste (The Socialist)_—a weekly newspaper published from
1885 as the theoretical organ of the French Workers’ Party; from 1902 it
was the organ of the Socialist Party of France, and from 1905 of the
French Socialist Party. The newspaper reprinted articles by Marx and
Engels and published articles by prominent leaders of the French and
international working-class move meat at the turn of the century: Paul
Lafargue, Wilhelm Liebknecht, Clara Zethin, 0. V. Plekhanov and others.
The newspaper ceased publication in 1915.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 2. HOW THE 'EMPIRIO-SYMBOLIST' YUSHKEVICH RIDICULED THE 'EMPIRIO-CRITICIST' CHERNOV


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Four: The Philosophical Idealists as Comrades-In-Arms and Successors of Empirio-Criticism )

2. How the “Empirio-Symbolist” Yushkevich Ridiculed the “Empirio-Criticist” Chernov

“It is, of course, amusing,” writes Mr. P. Yushkevich, “to see how Mr.
Chernov tries to make the agnostic positivist Comtean and Spencerian,
Mikhailovsky, a forerunner of Mach and Avenarius” (op. cit., p. 73).

First of all, what is amusing here is Mr. Yushkevich’s astonishing
ignorance. Like all Voroshilovs, he conceals this ignorance under a
display of erudite words and names. The passage quoted is from a
paragraph devoted to the relation between Machism and Marxism. And
although he undertakes to treat of this subject, Mr. Yushkevich does not
know that for Engels (as for every materialist) the adherents of the
Humean line and the adherents of the Kantian line are equally agnostics.
Therefore, to contrast agnosticism generally with Machism, when even
Mach himself confesses to being a follower of Hume, is simply to prove
oneself an ignoramus in philosophy. The phrase “agnostic positivism” is
also absurd, for the adherents of Hume in fact call themselves
positivists. Mr. Yushkevich, who has taken Petzoldt as his teacher,
should have known that Petzoldt definitely regards empirio-criticism as
positivism. And finally, to drag in the names of Auguste Comte and
Herbert Spencer is again absurd, for Marxism rejects not what
distinguishes one positivist from another, but what is common to both
and what makes a philosopher a positivist instead of a materialist.

Our Voroshilov needed this display of words so as to “mesmerise” his
reader, to stun him with a cacophony of words, to distract his attention
away _from the essence of the matter_ to empty trifles. And the essence
of the matter is the radical difference between materialism and the
broad current of positivism, which includes Auguste Comte, Herbert
Spencer,   Mikhailovsky, a number of Neo-Kantians, and Mach and
Avenarius. The essence of the matter has been very accurately expressed
by Engels in his _Ludwig Feuerbach,_ where he places all the Kantians
and Humeans of that period _(i.e.,_ the eighties of the last century) in
the camp of wretched eclectics, pettifoggers (_Flohknacker_ : literally,
flea-crackers), and so on.[2] To whom this characterisation can and must
apply is a question on which our Voroshilovs did not wish to reflect.
And since they are incapable of reflecting, we shall cite one
illuminating comparison. Engels, speaking both in 1888 and 1892 of the
Kantians and Humeans in general, mentions _no_ names.^([3]) The only
reference Engels makes to a book is his reference to the work of Starcke
on Feuerbach, which Engels analysed. “Starcke,” says Engels, “takes
great pains to defend Feuerbach against the attacks and doctrines of the
vociferous lecturers who today go by the name of philosophers in
Germany. For people who are interested in this afterbirth of German
classical philosophy this is a matter of importance; for Starcke himself
it may have appeared necessary. We, however, will spare the reader this”
(_Ludwig Feuerbach,_ S. 25).^([4])

Engels wanted to “spare the reader,” that is, to save the
Social-Democrats from a pleasant acquaintance with the degenerate
chatterboxes who call themselves philosophers. And who are implied by
this “afterbirth”?

We open Starcke’s book (C. N. Starcke, _Ludwig Feuerbach,_ Stuttgart,
1885), and find constant references to the adherents of _Hume and Kant_.
Starcke dissociates Feuerbach from these two trends. Starcke quotes in
this connection _A. Riehl, Windelband and A. Lange_ (pp. 3, 18-19, 127,
etc., in Starcke).

We open Avenarius’ _The Human Concept of the World,_ which appeared in
1891, and on page 120 of the first German edition we read: “The final
result of our analysis concurs—although not absolutely _(durchgehend)_
in the measure of the various points of view—with that reached by other
investigators, for example, _E_. _Laas,_ _E_. _Mach,_ _A_. _Riehl,_ _W_.
_Wundt_. See also _Schopenhauer_.”

Whom was our Voroshilov-Yushkevich jeering at?

Avenarius has not the slightest doubt as to his kinship in principle—not
regarding any particular question, but   regard ing the “final result”
of empirio-criticism—to the _Kantians_ Riehl and Laas and to the
_idealist_ Wundt. He mentions Mach between the two Kantians. And,
indeed, are they not all one company, since Riehl and Laas purified Kant
_à la_ Hume, and Mach and Avenarius purified Hume _à la_ Berkeley?

Is it surprising that Engels wished to “spare” the German workers, to
save them from a close acquaintance with this whole company of
“flea-cracking” university lecturers?

Engels could spare the German workers, but the Voroshilovs do not spare
the Russian reader.

It should be noted that an essentially eclectic combination of Kant and
Hume, or Hume and Berkeley, is possible, so to speak, in varying
proportions, by laying principal stress now on one, now on another
element of the mixture. We saw above, for instance, that only one
Machian, H. Kleinpeter, openly admits that he and Mach are solipsists
_(i.e.,_ consistent Berkeleians). On the other hand, the Humean trend in
the views of Mach and Avenarius is emphasised by many of their disciples
and followers: Petzoldt, Willy, Pearson, the Russian empirio-criticist
Lessevich, the Frenchman Henri Delacroix,^([1]) and others. We shall
cite one example—an especially emincllt scientist who in philosophy also
combined Hume with Berkeley, but who emphasised the materialist elements
of this mixture. He is Thomas Huxley, the famous English scientist, who
gave currency to the term “agnostic” and whom Engels undoubtedly had
chiefly and primarily in mind when he spoke of English agnosticism.
Engels in 1892 called this type of agnostics “shamefaced
materialists.”^([5]) James Ward, the English spiritualist, in his book
_Naturalism and Agnosticism,_ wherein he chiefly attacks the “scientific
champion of agnosticism,” Huxley (Vol. II, p. 229), bears out Engels’
opinion when he says: “In Huxley’s case indeed the leaning towards the
primacy of the physical side [“series of elements” Mach calls it] is
often so pronounced that it can hardly be called parallelism at all. In
spite   of his vehement repudiation of the title of materialist as an
affront to his untarnished agnosticism, I know of few recent writers who
on occasion better deserve the title” (Vol. II, pp. 30-3l). And James
Ward quotes the following statements by Huxley in confirmation of his
opinion: “‘Anyone who is acquainted with the history of science will
admit, that its progress has, in all ages, meant, and now more than ever
means, the extension of the province of what we call matter and
causation, and the concomitant gradual banishment from all regions of
human thought of what we call spirit and spontaneity.’” Or: “‘It is in
itself of little moment whether we express the phenomena of matter in
terms of spirit, or the phenomena of spirit in terms of matter—each
statement has a certain relative truth [“relatively stable complexes of
elements,” according to Mach]. But with a view to the progress of
science, the materialistic terminology is in every way to be preferred.
For it connects thought with the other phenomena of the universe. . .
whereas the alternative, or spiritualistic, terminology is utterly
barren, and leads to nothing but obscurity and confusion of ideas. . . .
Thus there can be little doubt, that the further science advances, the
more extensively and consistently will all the phenomena of Nature be
represented by materialistic formulae and symbols’” (Vol. I, p. 17-19).

So argued the “shamefaced materialist” Huxley, who refused to accept
materialism, regarding it as “metaphysics” that illegitimately goes
beyond “groups of sensations.” And this same Huxley wrote: “‘If I were
obliged to choose between absolute materialism and absolute idealism I
should feel compelled to accept the latter alternative. . . . Our one
certainty is the existence of the mental world’” (J. Ward, Vol. II, p.
216).

Huxley’s philosophy is as much a mixture of Hume and Berkeley as is
Mach’s philosophy. But in Huxley’s case the Berkeleian streaks are
incidental, and agnosticism serves as a fig-leaf for materialism. With
Mach the “colouring” of the mixture is a different one, and Ward, the
spiritualist, while bitterly combating Huxley, pats Avenarius and Mach
affectionately on the back.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] _Bibliotheque du congrès international de philosophie,_ Vol. IV,
Henri Delacroix, _David Hume et la philosophie critique [David Hume and
Critical Philosophy]_. Among the followers of Hume the author includes
Avenarius and the immanentists in Germany, Ch. Renouvier and his school
(the neo-criticists) in France. —_Lenin_

[2] K. Marx and F. Engels, _Selected Works_ Vol. II, Moscow,. 1958, p.
376.

[3] Lenin is referring to Engels’ work _Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of
Classical German Philosophy_ (1888) and the “Special Introduction to the
English Edition of 1892” of his _Socialism: Utopian and Scientific_ (see
K. Marx and F. Engels, _Selected Works,_ Vol. II, Moscow, 1958, pp.
370-71, 99-102).

[4] See K. Marx and F. Engels, _Selected Works,_ Vol. II, Moscow, 1958,
p. 378.

[5] See F. Engels’ “Special Introduction to the English Edition of 1892”
of his Socialism: Utopian and Scientific., (K. Marx and F. Engels,
Selected Works, Vol. II, Moscow, 1958, p. 99).

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 3.THE IMMANENTISTS AS COMRADES-IN-ARMS OF MACH AND AVENARIUS


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Four: The Philosophical Idealists as Comrades-In-Arms and Successors of Empirio-Criticism )

3.The Immanentists as Comrades-In-Arms of Mach and Avenarius

In speaking of empirio-criticism we could not avoid repeatedly
mentioning the philosophers of the so-called immanentist school, the
principal representatives of which are Schuppe, Leclair, Rehmke, and
Schubert-Soldern. It is now necessary to examine the relation of
empirio-criticism to the immanentists and the nature of the philosophy
preached by the latter.

In 1902 Mach wrote: “. . . Today I see that a host of
philosophers—positivists, empirio-criticists, adherents of the
immanentist philosophy—as well as a very few scientists, have all,
without knowing anything of each other, entered on new paths which, in
spite of their individual differences, converge almost towards one
point” _(Analysis of Sensations,_ p. 9). Here we must first note Mach’s
unusually frank admission that _very few_ scientists are followers of
the supposedly “new,” but in truth very old, Humean-Berkeleian
philosophy. Secondly, extremely important is Mach’s opinion that this
“new” philosophy is a broad _current_ in which the immanentists are on
the same footing as the empirio-criticists and the positivists.
“Thus”—repeats Mach in the introduction to the Russian translation of
the _Analysis of Sensations_ (1906)—“there is a common movement. . .”
(p. 4). “My position [Mach says in another place], moreover, borders
closely on that of the representatives of the immanentist philosophy. .
. . I found hardly anything in this book [_i.e._, W. Schuppe, _Outline
of the Theory of Knowledge and Logic]_ with which, with perhaps a very
slight change, I would not gladly agree” (p. 46). Mach considers that
Schubert-Soldern is also “following close paths” (p. 4), and as to
Wilhelm Schuppe, Mach even _dedicates_ to him his latest work, the
summary so to speak of his philosophical labours, _Knowledge and Error_.

Avenarius, the other founder of empirio-criticism, wrote in 1894 that he
was “gladdened” and “encouraged” by Schuppe’s sympathy for
empirio-criticism, and that the “differences” between him and Schuppe
“exist, perhaps, only temporarily” _(vielleicht nur einstweilen noch
bestehend_).^([1]) And,   finally, J. Petzoldt, whose teachings
Lessevich regards as the last word in empirio-criticism, _openly
acclaims the trio_—Schuppe, Mach and Avenarius—_as the leaders of the
“new” trend_. _(Einführung in die Philosophie der reinen Erfahrung,_ Bd.
II, 1904, S. 295; _Das Weltproblem,_ 1906, S. v. und 146). On this point
Petzoldt is definitely opposed to Willy _(Einf_., II, 321), probably the
only outstanding Machian who felt ashamed of such a kinship as Schuppe’s
and who tried to dissociate himself from him fundamentally, for which
this disciple was reprimanded by his beloved teacher Avenarius.
Avenarius wrote the words about Schuppe above quoted in a comment on
Willy’s article against Schuppe, adding that Willy’s criticism perhaps
“was put more strongly than was really necessary” _(Vierteljahrsschrift
für wissenschaftliche Philosophie,_ 18. Jahrg., 1894, S. 29; which also
contains Willy’s article against Schuppe).

Having acquainted ourselves with the empirio-criticists’ opinion of the
immanentists, let us examine the immanentists’ opinion of the
empirio-criticists. We have already mentioned the opinion uttered by
Leclair in 1879. Schubert-Soldern in 1882 explicitly expressed his
“agreement” “in part with the elder Fichte” _(i.e.,_ the distinguished
representative of subjective idealism, Johann Gottlieb Fichte, whose son
was as inept in philosophy as was the son of Joseph Dietzgen), and “with
Schuppe, Leclair, _Avenarius_ and partly with Rehmke,” while _Mach (Die
Geschichte und die Wurzel des_ _Satzes von der Erhaltung der Arbeit)_ is
cited with particular gusto in opposition to “natural-historical
metaphysics”^([2]) —the term given to natural-historical materialism by
all the reactionary university lecturers and professors in Germany. In
1893, after the appearance of Avenarius’ _The Human Concept of the
World,_ W. Schuppe hailed this work in _An Open Letter to Prof_.
_Avenarius_ as a “confirmation of the naïve realism” which he (Schuppe)
himself advocated. “My conception of thought,” Schuppe wrote,
“excellently harmonises with your [Avenarius’] pure   experience.”[3]
Then, in 1896, Schubert-Soldern, summarising the “methodological trend
in philosophy” on which he “bases himself,” traces his genealogy from
Berkeley and Hume down through F. A. Lange (“the real beginning of our
movement in Germany dates from Lange”), and then through Laas, Schuppe
and Co., _Avennrius_ and _Mach,_ _Riehl_ (among the Neo-Kantians), Ch.
Renouvier (among the Frenchmen), etc.^([4]) Finally, in their
programmatic “Introduction” printed in the first issue of the
philosophical organ of the immanentists, alongside a declaration of war
on materialism and an expression of sympathy with Charles Renouvier, we
read: “Even in the camp of the scientists themselves voices of
individual thinkers are being raised sermonising against the growing
arrogance of their colleagues, against the unphilosophical spirit which
has taken possession of the natural sciences. Thus the physicist Mach. .
. . On all hands fresh forces are stirring and are working to destroy
the blind faith in the infallibility of the natural sciences, and once
again people are beginning to seek for other paths into the profundities
of the mysterious, a better entrance to the house of truth.”^([5])

A word or two about Ch. Renouvier. He is the head of the influential and
widespread school in France known as the neo-criticists. His theoretical
philosophy is a combination of the phenomenalism of Hume and the
apriorism of Kant. The thing-in-itself is absolutely rejected. The
connection of phenomena, order and law is declared to be _a priori_ ;
law is written with a capital letter and is converted into the basis of
religion. The Catholic priests go into raptures over this philosophy.
The Machian Willy scornfully refers to Renouvier as a “second apostle
Paul,” as “an obscurantist of the first water” and as a “casuistic
preacher of free will” _(Gegen die Schulweisheit,_ S. 129). And it is
such co-thinkers of the immanentists who _warmly greet_ Mach’s
philosophy. When his _Mechanics_ appeared in a French translation, the  
organ of the neo-criticists—_L’Année philosophique_[11]—edited by
Pillon, a collaborator and disciple of Renouvier, wrote: “It is
unnecessary to speak of the extent to which, in this criticism of
substance, the thing, the thing-in-itself, Mach’s positive science
agrees with neo-critical idealism” (Vol. XV, 1904, p. 179).

As for the Russian Machians, they are all ashamed of their kinship with
the immanentists, and one of course could not expect anything else of
people who did not deliberately adopt the path of Struve, Menshikov, and
the like. Bazarov alone refers to “certain representatives of the
immanentist school” as “realists.”^([6]) Bogdanov briefly _(and in fact
falsely)_ declares that “the immanentist school is only an intermediate
form between Kantianism and empirio-criticism” _(Empirio-Monism,_ Bk.
III, p. xxii). V. Chernov writes: “Generally speaking, the immanentists
approach positivism in only one aspect of their theory, in other aspects
they go far beyond it” _(Philosophical and Sociological Studies,_ p.
37). Valentinov says that “the immanentist school clothed these
[Machian] ideas in an unsuitable form and found themselves in the blind
alley of solipsism” (op. cit., p. 149). As you see, you pay your money
and take your choice: constitution and salmon mayonnaise, realism and
solipsism. Our Machians are afraid to tell the plain and clear truth
about the immanentists.

The fact is that the immanentists are rank reactionaries, I open
advocates of fideism, unadulterated in their obscurantism. There is _not
one_ of them who has not _frankly_ made his more theoretical works on
epistemology a defence of religion and a justification of medievalism of
one kind or another. Leclair, in 1879, advocated his philosophy as one
that satisfies “all the needs of a religiously inclined mind” _(Der
Realismus,_ _etc_., S. 73). J. Rehmke, in 1880, dedicated his “theory of
knowledge” to the Protestant pastor Biedermann and closed his book by
preaching not a supersensible God, but God as a “real concept” (it was
for this reason presumably,   that Bazarov ranked “certain” immanentists
among the “realists”?), and moreover the “objectivisation of this real
concept is relegated to practical life,” while Biedermann’s “Christian
dogmatism” is declared to be a model of “scientific theology” (J.
Rehmke, _Die Welt als Wahrnehmung und Begriff,_ Berlin, 1880, S. 312).
Schuppe in the _Zeitschrift für immanente Philosophie_ assures us that
though the immanentists deny the transcendental, God and the future life
do not come under this concept _(Zeitschrift für immanente Philosophie,_
II. Band, S. 52). In his _Ethik_ he insists on the “connection of the
moral law . . . with the metaphysical world conception” and condemns the
separation of the church from the state as a “senseless phrase” (Dr.
Wilhelm Schuppe, _Grundzüge der Ethik und Rechtsphilosophie [Principles
of Ethics and the Philosophy of Law],_ Breslau, 1881, S. 181, 325).
Schubert-Soldern in his _Foundations of the Theory of Cognition_[7]
deduces both the pre-existence of the self before the body and the
after-existence of the _self_ after the body, _i.e.,_the immortality of
the soul (op. cit., p. 82), etc. In _The Social Question_,^([8]) arguing
against Bebel, he defends, together with “social reforms,” suffrage
based on class distinction, and says that the “Social-Democrats ignore
the fact that without the divine gift of unhappiness there could be no
happiness” (p. 330), and thereupon laments the fact that materialism
“prevails” (p. 242): “he who in our time believes in a life beyond, or
even in its possibility, is considered a fool” _(ibid_.).

And German Menshikovs like these, no less obscurantists of the first
water than Renouvier, live in lasting concubinage with the
empirio-criticists. Their theoretical kinship is in contestable. There
is no more Kantianism in the immanentists than in Petzoldt or Pearson.
We saw above that they themselves regard themselves as disciples of Hume
and Berkeley, an opinion of the immanentists that is generally
recognised in philosophical literature. In order to show clearly what
epistemological premises these comrades-in-arms of Mach and Avenarius
proceed from, we shall quote some fundamental theoretical propositions
from the works of immanentists.

Leclair in 1879 had not yet invented the term “immanent,” which really
signifies “experiential,” “given in experience,” and which is just as
spurious a label for concealing corruption as the labels of the European
bourgeois parties. In his first work, Leclair frankly and explicitly
calls himself a “_critical idealist_” _(Der Realismus,_ _etc_., S. 11,
21, 206, etc.). In this work he criticises Kant, as we have already
seen, for his concessions to materialism, and clearly indicates his _wn_
path _away from_ Kant to Fichte and Berkeley. Leclair fights materialism
in general and _the tendency towards materialism displayed by the
majority of scientists_ in particular as mercilessly as Schuppe,
Schubert-Soldern and Rehmke.

“If we return,” Leclair says, “to the standpoint of critical idealism,
if we do not attribute a transcendental existence [_i.e._, an existence
outside of human consciousness] to nature or the processes of nature,
then for the subject the aggregate of bodies and his own body, in so far
as he can see and feel it, together with all its changes, will be a
directly given phenomenon of spatially connected co-existences and
successions in time, and the whole explanation of nature will reduce
itself to stating the laws of these co-existences and successions” (p.
21).

Back to Kant!—said the reactionary Neo-Kantians. Back to Fichte and
Berkeley!—is _essentially_ what the reactionary immanentists are saying.
For Leclair, all that exists consists of “_complexes of sensations_” (p.
38), while certain classes of properties _(Eigenschaften),_ which act
upon our sense-organs, he designates, for example, by the letter M, and
other classes, which act upon other objects of nature, by the letter N
(p. 150, etc.). Moreover, Leclair speaks of nature as the “phenomena of
the consciousness” (Bewusstseinsphänomen) not of a single person, but of
“mankind” (pp. 55-56). If we remember that Leclair published his book in
Prague, where Mach was professor of physics, and that Leclair cites with
rapture only Mach’s _Erhaltung der Arbeit,_ which appeared in 1872, the
question involuntarily arises: ought we not to regard the advocate of
fideism and frank idealist Leclair as the true progenitor of the
“original” philosophy of Mach?

As for Schuppe, who, according to Leclair,^([9]) arrived at the “same
results,” he, as we have seen, really claims to defend “naïve realism,”
and in his _Open Letter to Prof_. _Avenarius_ bitterly complains of the
“established perversion of my [Schuppe’s] theory of knowledge to
subjective idealism.” The true nature of the crude forgery which the
immanentist Schuppe calls a defence of realism is quite clear from his
rejoinder to Wundt, who did not hesitate to class the immanentists with
the Fichteans, the subjective idealists _(Philosophische Studien,_
_loc_. _cit_., S. 386, 397, 407).

“In my case,” Schuppe _retorts_ to Wundt, “the proposition ‘being is
consciousness’ means that consciousness without the external world is
inconceivable, that the latter belongs to the former, _i.e.,_the
absolute connection _(Zusammengehörigkeit)_ of the one with the other,
which I have so often asserted and explained and in which the two
constitute the primary whole of being.”^([10])

One must be extremely naïve not to discern unadulterated subjective
idealism in such “realism”! Just think: the external world “belongs to
consciousness” and is in _absolute_ connection with it! The poor
professor was indeed slandered by the “established” practice of ranking
him with the subjective idealists! Such a philosophy completely
coincides with Avenarius’ “principal co-ordination”; no reservations and
protests on the part of Chernov and Valentinov can sunder them; both
philosophies will be consigned together to the museum of reactionary
fabrications of German professordom. As a curiosity once more testifying
to Valentinov’s lack of judgment, let us note that he calls Schuppe a
solipsist (it goes without saying that Schuppe vowed and swore that he
was not a solipsist—and wrote special articles to this effect—just as
vehemently as did Mach, Petzoldt, and Co.), yet is highly delighted with
Bazarov’s article in the _Studies_ ! I should like to translate into
German Bazarov’s dictum that “sense-perception is the reality existing
outside us” and forward it to some more or less intelligent immanentist.
He would embrace and kiss Bazarov as heartily as the Schuppes, Leclairs
  and Schubert-Solderns embraced Mach and Avenarius. For Bazarov’s
dictum is the _alpha and omega_ of the doctrines of the immanentist
school.

And here, lastly, is Schubert-Soldern. “The materialism of natural
science,” the “metaphysics” of recognising the objective reality of the
external world, is the chief enemy of this philosopher _(Grundlagen
einer Erkenntnistheorie,_ 1884, p. 31 and the whole of Chapter II: “The
Metaphysics of Natural Science”). “Natural science abstracts from all
relations of consciousness” (p. 52)—that is the chief evil (and that is
just what constitutes materialism!). For the individual cannot escape
from “sensations and, hence, from a state of consciousness” (pp. 33-34).
Of course, Schubert-Soldern admitted in 1896, my standpoint is
_epistemological solipsism (Die soziale Frage,_ S. x), but not
“metaphysical,” not “practical” solipsism. “What is given us immediately
is sensations, complexes of constantly changing sensations” _(Ueber
Transcendenz des Objekts und Subjekts,_ S. 73).

“Marx took the material process of production,” says Schubert-Soldern,
“as the cause of inner processes and motives, in the same way (and just
as falsely) as natural science regards the common [to humanity] external
world as the cause of the individual inner worlds” _(Die soziale Frage,_
S. xviii). That Marx’s historical materialism is connected with
natural-historical materialism and philosophical materialism in general,
it does not even occur to this comrade in-arms of Mach to doubt.

“Many, perhaps the majority, will be of the opinion that from the
standpoint of epistemological solipsism no metaphysics is possible,
_i.e.,_that metaphysics is always transcendental. Upon more mature
reflection I cannot concur with this opinion. Here are my reasons. . . .
The immediate foundation of all that is given is the spiritual
(solipsist) connection, the central point of which is the individual
_self_ (the individual realm of thought) with its body. The rest of the
world is inconceivable without this _self,_ just as this _self_ is
inconceivable without the rest of the world. With the destruction of the
individual _self_ the world is also annihilated, which appears
impossible—and with the destruction of the rest of the world, nothing
remains for my individual _self,_ for the latter can be separated from
the world   only logically, but not in time and space. Therefore my
individual _self_ must continue to exist after my death also, if the
entire world is not to be annihilated with it. . .” _(ibid_., p. xxiii).

The “principal co-ordination,” “complexes of sensations” and the rest of
the Machian banalities render faithful service to the proper people!

“. . . What is the hereafter _(das Jenseits)_ from the solipsist point
of view? It is only a possible future experience for me. . .” _(ibid_.).
“Spiritualism . . . would be obliged to prove the existence of the
Jenseits. But at any rate the materialism of natural science cannot be
brought into the field against spiritualism, for this materialism, as we
have seen, is only one aspect of the world process within the
all-embracing spiritual connection” ( = the “principal co-ordination”)
(p. xxiv).

All this is said in that philosophical introduction to _Die soziale
Frage_ (1896) wherein Schubert-Soldern _all the time_ appears arm in arm
with Mach and Avenarius. Only for the handful of Russian Machians does
Machism serve exclusively for purposes of intellectual prattle. In its
native country its role as a flunkey to fideism is openly proclaimed!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] _Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie,_ 1894, 18.
Jahrg., Heft I, S. 29. —_Lenin_

[2] Dr. Richard von Schubert-Soldern, _Ueber Transcendenz des Objekts
und Subjekts [On the Transcendence of the Object and Subject],_ 1882, S.
37 and 5. _Cf_. also his _Grundlagen einer Erkenntnistheorie [Principles
of a Theory of Knowledge],_ 1884, S. 3. —_Lenin_

[3] _Vierteijahrsschlift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie,_ 17. Jahrg.,
1893, S. 384. —_Lenin_

[4] Dr. Richard von Schubert-Soldern, _Das menschliche Glück und die
soziale Frage [Human Happiness and the Social Question],_ 1896, S. v,
vi. —_Lenin_

[5] _Zeitschrift für immanente Philosophie_,^([12]) Bd. I, Berlin, 1896,
S. 6, 9. —_Lenin_

[6] “Realists in modern philosophy—certain representatives of the
immanentist school who have emerged from Kantianism, the school of
Mach-Avenarius, and many other kindred movements—find that there are
absolutely no grounds for rejecting the basis of naïve realism”
_(Studies,_ _etc_., p. 26). —_Lenin_

[7] Schubert-Soldern, _Grundlage einer Erkenntnistheorie_.—_Ed_.

[8] _Die soziale Frage_.—_Ed_.

[9] _Beiträge zu einer monistischen Erkenntnistheorie [Essays in a
Monistic Theory of Knowledge],_ Breslau, 1882, S. 10. —_Lenin_

[10] Wilhelm Schuppe, “_Die immanente Philosophie und Wilhelm Wundt_”
[“_The Immanent Philosophy and Wilhelm Wundt_”] _Zeitschrift für
immanente Philosophie,_ Band II, S. 195. —_Lenin_

[12] Zeitschrift für immanente Philosophia (Journal for Immmanentist
Philosophy)—a German reactionary journal, published in Berlin from 1895
to 1900 under the editorship of M. B. Kauffmann, with the participation
of Wilhelm Schuppe and Richard von Schubert Soldern. p. 211

[11] L’Année philosophique (The Philosophical Year,)—the organ of the
French “neo-criticists”, published in Paris from 1890 to 1913 under the
editorship of F. Pillon. p. 212

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 4. WHITHER IS EMPIRIO-CRITICISM TENDING?


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Four: The Philosophical Idealists as Comrades-In-Arms and Successors of Empirio-Criticism )

4. Whither is Empirio-Criticism Tending?

Let us now cast a glance at the development of Machism after Mach and
Avenarius. We have seen that their philosophy is a hash, a pot-pourri of
contradictory and disconnected epistemological propositions. We must now
examine how and whither, _i.e.,_in what direction, this philosophy is
developing, for this will help us to settle certain “disputable”
questions by referring to indisputable historical facts. And indeed, in
view of the eclecticism and incoherence of the initial philosophical
premises of the trend we are examining, varying interpretations of it
and sterile disputes over particulars and trifles are absolutely
inevitable. But empirio-criticism, like every ideological current, is a
living thing, which grows and develops, and the fact that it is growing
in one direction or another will help us more than long arguments to
settle the _basic_ question as to what the real essence of this
philosophy is. We judge a person not by what   he says or thinks of
himself but by his actions. And we must judge philosophers not by the
labels they give themselves (“positivism,” the philosophy of “pure
experience,” “monism” or “empirio-monism,” the “philosophy of natural
science,” etc.) but by the manner in which they actually settle
fundamental theoretical questions, by their associates, by what they are
teaching and by what they have taught their disciples and followers.

It is this last question which interests us now. Everything essential
was said by Mach and Avenarius more than twenty years ago. It was bound
to become clear in the interval _how_ these “leaders” were _understood_
by those who wanted to understand them, and whom they themselves (at
least Mach, who has outlived his colleague) regard as their successors.
To be specific, let us take those who themselves claim to be disciples
of Mach and Avenarius (or their adherents) and whom Mach himself ranks
as such. We shall thus obtain a picture of empirio-criticism as a
philosophical _current,_ and not as a collection of literary oddities.

In Mach’s Introduction to the Russian translation of the _Analysis of
Sensations,_ Hans Cornelius is recommended as a “young investigator” who
is following “if not quite the same, at least very close paths” (p. 4).
In the text of the _Analysis of Sensations_ Mach once again “mentions
with pleasure the works” of Cornelius and others, “who have disclosed
the kernel of Avenarius’ ideas and have developed them further” (p. 48).
Let us take Cornelius’ _Introduction to the Philosophy_^([1]) and we
find that its author also speaks of his endeavour to follow in the
footsteps of Mach and Avenarius (pp. viii, 32). We have before us then a
_disciple acknowledged by the teacher_. This disciple also begins with
sensations-elements (pp. 17, 24), categorically declares that he
confines himself to experience (p. vi), calls his views “consistent or
epistemological empiricism” (p. 335), emphatically condemns the “one
sidedness” of idealism and the “dogmatism” of both the idealists and the
materialists (p. 129), vehemently denies the possible “misconception”
(p. 123) that his philosophy implies the recognition of the world as
existing in the mind of man, flirts with naïve realism no   less
skilfully than Avenarius, Schuppe or Bazarov (“a visual, as well as
every other sense perception, is located where we find it, and only
where we find it, that is to say, where the naïvenaïve mind, untouched
by a false philosophy, localises it”—p. 125)—and this disciple,
acknowledged as such by his teacher, arrives at _immortality_ and _God_.
Materialism—thunders this police sergeant in a professorial chair, I beg
your pardon, this disciple of the “recent positivists”—converts man into
an automaton. “It need hardly be said that together with the belief in
the freedom of our decisions it destroys all considerations of the moral
value of our actions and our responsibility for them. Just as little
room is left for the idea of the continuation of our life after death”
(p. 116). The final note of the book is: Education (or the youth
stultified by this man of science presumably) is necessary not only for
action but “above all . . . to inculcate veneration _(Ehrfurcht)_ not
for the transitory values of a fortuitous tradition, but for the
imperishable values of duty and beauty, for the divine _(dem
Göttlichen)_ within us and without” (p. 357).

Compare this with Bogdanov’s assertion that “there is _absolutely no
room_” (Bogdanov’s italics) and “there cannot be any room” for the idea
of God, freedom of the will and immortality of the soul in Mach’s
philosophy in view of his denial of every “thing-in-itself” (p. xii).
While Mach in this same book (p. 293) declares that “there is no Machian
philosophy,” and recommends not only the immanentists, but also
Cornelius who had disclosed the kernel of Avenarius’ ideas! Thus, in the
first place, Bogdanov _absolutely does not know_ the “Machian
philosophy” as a current which not only nestles under the wing of
fideism, but which itself goes to the length of fideism. In the second
place, Bogdanov _absolutely does not know_ the history of philosophy;
for to associate a denial of the ideas mentioned above with a denial of
the thing-in-itself is to insult the history of philosophy. Will
Bogdanov take it into his head to deny that all consistent followers of
Hume, by rejecting every kind of thing-in-itself, _do leave room_ for
these ideas? Has Bogdanov never heard of the subjective idealists, who
reject every kind of thing in-itself and thereby make room for these
ideas? “There can be no room” for   these ideas _solely_ in a philosophy
that teaches that nothing exists but perceptual being, that the world is
matter in motion, that the external world, the physical world familiar
to all, is the sole objective reality—_i.e.,_in the philosophy of
materialism. And it is for this, precisely for this, that materialism is
combated by the immanentists recommended by Mach, by Mach’s disciple
Cornelius, and by modern professorial philosophy in general.

Our Machians began to repudiate Cornelius only after this indecency had
been pointed out to them. Such repudiations are not worth much.
Friedrich Adler evidently has not been “warned,” and therefore
recommends this Cornelius in a socialist journal _(Der Kampf,_ 1908, 5,
S. 235: “a work that is easy to read and highly to be commended”).
Through the medium of Machism, downright philosophical reactionaries and
preachers of fideism are palmed off on the workers as teachers!

Petzoldt, without having been warned, detected the falsity in Cornelius:
but his method of combating this falsity is a gem. Listen to this: “To
assert that the world is idea [as is asserted by the idealists—whom we
are combating, no joke!] has sense only when it implies that it is the
idea of the predicator, or, if you like, of all predicators, _i.e.,_that
its existence depends exclusively upon the thought of that individual or
of those individuals; it exists only inasmuch as he thinks about it, and
what he does not think of does not exist. We, on the contrary, make the
world dependent not upon the thought of an individual or individuals,
or, to put it better and clearer, not upon the act of thinking, or upon
any actual thought, but—and exclusively in the logical sense—upon
thought in general. The idealist confuses one with the other, and the
result is agnostic semi-solipsism, as we observe it in Cornelius”
_(Einführung,_ II, 317).

Stolypin denied the existence of the _cabinets noirs_!^([5]) Petzoldt
annihilates the idealists! It is truly astonishing how much this
annihilation of idealism resembles a recommendation to the idealists to
exercise more skill in concealing their idealism. To say that the world
depends upon man’s thought is perverted idealism. To say that the world
depends upon thought in general is recent positivism, critical
realism—in a word, thoroughgoing bourgeois charlatanism!   If Cornelius
is an agnostic semi-solipsist, Petzoldt is a solipsist semi-agnostic.
You are cracking a flea, gentlemen!

Let us proceed. In the second edition of his _Erkenntnis und Irrtum,_
Mach says: “A systematic exposition [of Mach’s views], one to which in
all its essentials I can subscribe, is given by Professor Dr. Hans
Kleinpeter” _(Die Erkenntnistheorie der Naturforschung der Gegenwart,_
Leipzig, 1905: _The Theory of Knowledge of Modern Natural Science)_. Let
us take Hans Number Two. This professor is an accredited disseminator of
Machism: a pile of articles on Mach’s views in philosophical journals,
both in German and in English, translations of works recommended by Mach
with introductions by Mach—in a word, the right hand of the “teacher.”
Here are his views: “. . . All my (outer and inner) experience, all my
thoughts and aspirations are given me as a psychical process, as a part
of my consciousness” (op. cit. p. 18). “That which we call physical is a
construction of psychical elements” (p. 144). “_Subjective conviction,_
_not objective certainty (Gewissheit)_ _is the only attainable goal of
any science_” (p. 9). (The italics are Kleinpeter’s, who adds the
following remark: “Something similar was already said by Kant in the
_Critique of Practical Reason_.”) “The assumption that there are other
minds is one which can never be confirmed by experience” (p. 42). “I do
not know. . . whether, in general, there exist other _selves_ outside of
myself” (p. 43). In § 5, entitled “Activity (Spontaneity) in
Consciousness,” we read that in the case of the animal-automaton the
succession of ideas is purely mechanical. The same is true of us when we
dream. “The quality of our consciousness in its normal state essentially
differs from this. It possesses a property which these [the automata]
entirely lack, and which it would be very difficult, to say the least,
to explain mechanically or automatically: the so-called self-activity of
the _self_. Every person can dissever himself from his states of
consciousness, he can manipulate them, can make them stand out more
clearly or force them into the background, can analyse them, compare
various parts, etc. All this is a fact of (immediate) experience. Our
_self_ is therefore essentially different from the sum-total of the
states of consciousness and cannot be put as an equivalent of it. Sugar
consists of carbon, hydrogen   and oxygen; were we to attribute a soul
to it, then by analogy it would have to possess the faculty of directing
the movement of the hydrogen, oxygen and carbon at will” (pp. 29–30).
§ 4 of the following chapter is headed: “The Act of Cognition—an Act of
Will _(Willenshandlung)_.” “It must be regarded as definitely
established that all my psychical experiences are divisible into two
large main groups: compulsory acts and deliberate acts. To the former
belong all impressions of the external world” (p. 47). “That it is
possible to advance several theories regarding one and the same realm of
facts . . . is as well known to physicists as it is incompatible with
the premises of an absolute theory of knowledge. And this fact is also
linked with the volitional character of our thought; it also implies
that our volition is not bound by external circumstances” (p. 50).

Now judge how bold Bogdanov was in asserting that in Mach’s philosophy
“there is absolutely no room for free will,” when Mach himself
recommends such a specimen as Kleinpeter! We have already seen that the
latter does not attempt to conceal either his own idealism or Mach’s. In
1898-99 Kleinpeter wrote: “Hertz proclaims the same subjectivist view
[_i.e._, as Mach] of the nature of our concepts. . . . If Mach and Hertz
[with what justice Kleinpeter here implicates the famous physicist we
shall soon see] deserve credit from the standpoint of idealism for
having emphasised the subjective origin of _all_ our concepts and of the
connections between them—and not only of certain individual ones—from
the standpoint of empiricism they deserve no less credit for having
acknowledged that experience alone, as a court entirely independent of
thought, can solve the question of their correctness” _(Archiv für
systematische Philosophie,_ Bd. V, 1898-99, S. 169-70). In 1900 he wrote
that in spite of all the points on which Mach differs from Kant and
Berkeley, “they at any rate are more akin to him than the metaphysical
empiricism prevailing in natural science [_i.e._, materialism! The
professor does not like to call the devil by name] which is indeed the
main target of Mach’s attacks” (op. cit., Bd. VI, S. 87). In 1903 he
wrote: “The starting point of Berkeley and Mach is irrefutable. . . .
Mach completed what Kant began” _(Kantstudien,_ Bd. VIII, 1903, S. 314,
274).

In the preface to the Russian edition of the _Analysis of Sensations_
Mach also mentions T. Ziehen, “who is following, if not the same, at
least very close paths.” We take Professor Theodor Ziehen’s book _The
Psychophysiological Theory of Knowledge (Psychophysiologische
Erkenntnistheorie,_ Jena, 1898) and hnd that the author refers to Mach,
Avenarius, Schuppe, and so forth in the very introduction. Here
therefore we again have a case of a disciple acknowledged by the
teacher. Ziehen’s “recent” theory is that only the “mob” is capable of
believing that “real objects evoke our sensations” (p. 3), and that
“over the portals of the theory of knowledge there can be no other
inscription than the words of Berkeley: ‘The external objects subsist
not by themselves, but exist in our minds!’” (p. 5). “What is given us
is sensations and ideas. Both are embraced by the word psychical.
Non-psychical is a word devoid of meaning” (p. 100). The laws of nature
are relations not of material bodies but of “reduced sensations” (p.
104. This “new” concept—“reduced sensations”—contains everything that is
original in Ziehen’s Berkeleianismt).

Petzoldt repudiated Ziehen as an idealist as far back as 1904 in the
second volume of his _Introduction_ (S. 298-301). By 1906 he had already
included Cornelius, Kleinpeter, Ziehen and Verworn _(Das Weltproblem,_
_etc_., S. 137 Fussnote) in the list of _idealists or psychomonists_. In
the case of all these worthy professors, you see, there is a
“misconception” in their interpretations “of the views of Mach and
Avenarius” (ibid .).

Poor Mach and Avenarius! Not only were they slandered by their enemies
for idealism and “even” (as Bogdanov expresses it) solipsism, but their
very friends, disciples and followers, expert professors, also
understood their teachers pervertedly, in an idealist sense. If
empirio-criticism is developing into idealism, that by no means
demonstrates the radical falsity of its muddled Berkeleian basic
premises. God forbid! It is only a slight “misconception,” in the
Nozdriev-Petzoldt^([6]) sense of the term.

The funniest thing of all perhaps is that Petzoldt himself, the guardian
of purity and innocence, firstly, “supplemented” Mach and Avenarius with
his “logical _a priori_” and, secondly, coupled them with Wilhelm
Schuppe, the vehicle of fideism.

Had Petzoldt been acquainted with Mach’s English adherents he would have
had very considerably to extend the list of Machians who had lapsed
(because of a “misconception”) into idealism. We have already referred
to Karl Pearson, whom Mach praised, as an unadulterated idealist. Here
are the opinions of two other “slanderers” who say the same thing of
Pearson: “Professor Pearson is merely echoing a doctrine first given
clear utterance by the truly great Berkeley” (Howard V. Knox, _Mind,_
Vol. VI, 1897, p. 205). “There can be no doubt that Mr. Pearson is an
idealist in the strictest sense of the word” (Georges Rodier, _Revue
philosophique_,^([7]) 1888, II, Vol. 26, p. 200). The English idealist,
William Clifford, whom Mach regards as “coming very close” to his
philosophy _(Analysis of Sensations,_ p. 8), must be considered a
teacher rather than a disciple of Mach, for Clifford’s philosophical
works appeared in the seventies. Here the “misconception” is due to Mach
himself, who in 1901 “failed to notice” the idealism in Clifford’s
doctrine that the world is “mind-stuff,” a “social object,” a “highly
organised experience,” and so forth.^([2]) For a characterisation of the
charlatanism of the German Machians, it is sufficient to note that
Kleinpeter in 1905 elevated this idealist to the rank of founder of the
“epistemology of modern science”!

On page 284 of the _Analysis of Sensations,_ Mach mentions the “kindred”
(to Buddhism and Machism) American philosopher, Paul Carus. Carus, who
calls himself an “admirer and personal friend” of Mach, edits in Chicago
_The Monist,_ a journal devoted to philosophy, and _The Open
Court_,^([8]) a journal devoted to the propagation of religion. “Science
is divine revelation,” say the editors of this popular little journal,
and they express the opinion that science can bring about a reform of
the church that will retain “all that is true and good in religion.”
Mach is a regular contributor to _The Monist_ and publishes in it
individual chapters from his latest works. Carus corrects Mach “ever so
little” _à la_ Kant, and declares that Mach “is an idealist or, as we
would   say, a subjectivist.” “There are, no doubt, differences between
Mach’s views and mine,” although “I at once recognised in him a kindred
spirit”.[3] “Our Monism,” says Carus, “is not materialistic, not
spiritualistic, not agnostic; it merely means consistency . . . it takes
experience as its basis and employs as method the systematic forms of
the relations of cxperience” (evidently a plagiarism from Bogclanov’s
_Empirio-Monism_ !) . Carus’ motto is: “Not agnosticism, but positive
science, not mysticism, but clear thinking, not supernaturalism, not
materialism, but a monistic view of the world, not a dogma, but
religion, not creed, but faith.” And in conformity with this motto Carus
preaches a “new theology,” a “scientific theology,” or theonomy, which
denies the literalness of the bible but insists that “all truth is
divine and God reveals himself in science as he does in history.”^([4])
It should be remarked that Kleinpeter, in his book on the theory of
knowledge of modern science already referred to, recommends Carus,
together with Ostwald, Avenarius and the immanentists (pp. 151-52). When
Haeckel issued his theses for a Monistic Alliance, Carus vigorously
opposed him on the ground that, first, Haeckel vainly attempts to refute
apriorism, which is “quite in keeping with scientific philosophy”;
second, that Haeckel’s doctrine of determinism “excludes the possibility
of free will”; third, that Haeckel is mistaken “in emphasising the
one-sided view of the naturalist against the traditional conservatism of
the churches. Thus he appears as an enemy to the existing churches
instead of rejoicing at their higher development into a new and truer
interpretation of their dogmas . . .” _(ibid_., Vol. XVI, 1906, p. 122).
Carus himself admits that “I appear reactionary to many freethinkers who
blame me for not joining their chorus in denouncing all religion as
superstition” (p. 355).

It is quite evident that we have here a leader of a gang of American
literary fakers who are engaged in doping the people with religious
opium. Mach and Kleinpeter joined this gang evidently as the result of a
slight “misconception.”

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] Cornelius, _Einleitung in die Philosophie_ [_Introduction to
Philosophy]_ (Germ. ed., 1903) —_Ed_.

[2] William Kingdon Clifford, _Lectues and Essays,_ 3rd ed., London,
1901, Vol. II, pp. 55, 65, 69: “On this point I agree entirely with
Berkeley and not with Mr. Spencer” (p. 58); “The object, then, is a set
of changes _in_ my consciousness, and not anything out of it” (p. 52).
—_Lenin_

[3] _The Monist_,^([9]) Vol. XVI, 1906, July; P. Carus, “Professor
Mach’s Philosophy,” pp. 320, 345, 333. The article is a reply to an
article by Kleinpeter which appeared in the same journal. —_Lenin_

[4] _Ibid_., Vol. XIII, p. 24 _et seq_., “Theology as a Science,” an
article by Carus. —_Lenin_

[5] Lenin is referring to the lying statement of P. A. Stolypin,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers, who denied the existence in the
postal service of “cabinets Theirs” engaged in examining the
correspondence of persons regarded as suspects by the tsarist
government.

[6] _Nosdrev_—a character in N. V. Gogol’s novel _Dead Souls;_ a
landlord, swindler and trouble-maker. Gogol called him a “historical
personage”, since wherever he appeared “histories” and rows developed.

[7] _Revue philosephique de la France et de l’Etranger (Philosophical
Review of France and Abroad)_—a journal founded in Paris in 1876 by the
French psychologist Thédodule Bibot.

[8] _The Open Court_—a journal of a religious tendency, published in
Chicago from 1887 to 1936.

[9] _The Monist—an_ American philosophical journal of an idealist
tendency, edited by Paul Carus. It was published in Chicago from 1890 to
1936.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 5. A. BOGDANOV'S 'EMPIRIO-MONISM'


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Four: The Philosophical Idealists as Comrades-In-Arms and Successors of Empirio-Criticism )

5. A. Bogdanov’s “Empirio-Monism”

“I personally,” writes Bogdanov of himself, “know so far of only one
empirio-monist in literature—a certain A. Bogdanov. But I know him very
well and can answer for it that his views fully accord with the
sacramental formula of the primacy of nature over mind. To wit, he
regards all that exists as a continuous chain of development, the lower
links of which are lost in the chaos of elements, while the higher
links, known to us, represent the _experience of men_ [Bogdanov’s
italics]—psychical and, still higher, physical experience. This
experience, and the knowledge resulting therefrom, correspond to what is
usually called mind” _(Empirio-Monism,_ III, xii).

 The “sacramental” formula here ridiculed by Bogdanov is the well-known
proposition of Engels, whom Bogdanov, however, diplomatically avoids
mentioning! We do not differ from Engels, oh, no!

But let us examine more carefully Bogdanov’s own summary of his famous
“empirio-monism” and “substitution.” The physical world is called the
_experience of men_ and it is declared that physical experience is
“_higher_” in the chain of development than psychical. But this is utter
nonsense! And it is precisely the kind of nonsense that is
characteristic of all idealist philosophies. It is simply farcical for
Bogdanov to class this “system” as materialism. With me, too, he says,
nature is primary and mind secondary. If Engels’ definition is to be
thus construed, then Hegel is also a materialist, for with him, too,
psychical experience (under the title of the Absolute Idea) comes first,
then follow, “higher up,” the physical world, nature, and, lastly, human
knowledge, which through nature apprehends the Absolute Idea. Not a
single idealist will deny the primacy of nature taken in this sense for
it is not a genuine primacy, since in fact nature is not taken as the
_immediately_ given, as the starting point of epistemology. Nature is in
fact reached as the result of a long process _through abstraction_ of
the “psychical.” It is immaterial what these abstractions are called:
whether Absolute Idea, Universal Self, World Will, and so on and so
forth. These terms distinguish the different varieties of idealism, and
such varieties exist in countless   numbers. The essence of idealism is
that the psychical is taken as the starting point; from it external
nature is deduced, _and only then_ is the ordinary human consciousness
deduced from nature. Hence, this primary “psychical” always turns out to
be a _lifeless abstraction_ concealing a diluted theology. For instance,
everybody knows what a human _idea_ is; but an idea independent of man
and prior to man, an idea in the abstract, an Absolute Idea, is a
theological invention of the idealist Hegel. Everybody knows what human
sensation is; but sensation independent of man, sensation prior to man,
is nonsense, a lifeless abstraction, an idealist artifice. And it is
precisely to such an idealistic artifice that Bogdanov resorts when he
erects the following ladder.

1)The chaos of “elements” (we know that no other human concept lies back
of the term “element” save sensation).

2)The psychical experience of men.

3)The physical experience of men.

4) “The knowledge emerging therefrom.”

There are no sensations (human) without man. Hence, the first rung of
this ladder is a lifeless idealist abstraction. As a matter of fact,
what we have here is not the usual and familiar _human_ sensations, but
fictitious sensations, _nobody’s_ sensations, sensations _in general,_
divine sensations—just as the ordinary human idea became divine with
Hegel when it was divorced from man and man’s brain.

So away with the first rung!

Away also with the second rung, for the _psychical before_ the physical
(and Bogdanov places the second rung _before_ the third) is something
unknown to man or science. The physical realm existed before the
psychical could have appeared, for the latter is the highest product of
the highest forms of organic matter. Bogdanov’s second rung is also a
lifeless abstraction, it is thought without brain, human reason divorced
from man.

Only when we throw out the hrst two rungs, and only then, can we obtain
a picture of the world that truly corresponds to science and
materialism. To wit: 1) the physical world exists _independently_ of the
mind of man and existed long _prior to_ man, _prior to_ any “human
experience”;   2) the psychical, the mind, etc., is the highest product
of matter _(i.e.,_ the physical), it is a function of that particularly
complex fragment of matter called the human brain.

“The realm of substitution,” writes Bogdanov, “coincides with the realm
of physical phenomena; for the psychical phenomena we need substitute
nothing, because they are immediate complexes” (p. xxxix).

And this precisely is idealism; for the psychical, _i.e.,_consciousness,
idea, sensation, etc., is taken as the _immediate_ and the physical is
deduced from it, substituted for it. The world is the _non-ego_ created
by the _ego,_ said Fichte. The world is absolute idea, said Hegel. The
world is will, said Schopenhauer. The world is conception and idea, says
the immanentist Rehmke. Being is consciousness, says the immanentist
Schuppe. The physical is a substitution for the psychical, says
Bogdanov. One must be blind not to perceive the identical idealist
essence under these various verbal cloaks.

“Let us ask ourselves the following question,” writes Bogdanov in Book I
of _Empirio-Monism_ (pp. 128-29): “What is a ‘living being,’ for
instance, ‘man’?” And he answers: “‘Man’ is primarily a definite complex
of ‘immediate experiences.’ [Mark, “_primarily_”!] _Then,_ in the
further development of experience, ‘man’ becomes both for himself and
for others a physical body amidst other physical bodies.”

Why, this is a sheer “complex” of absurdities, fit only for deducing the
immortality of the soul, or the idea of God, and so forth. Man is
primarily a complex of immediate experiences and in the course of
_further development_ becomes a physical body! That means that there are
“immediate experiences” _without_ a physical body, _prior to_ a physical
body! What a pity that this magnificent philosophy has not yet found
acceptance in our theological seminaries! There its merits would have
been fully appreciated.

“. . . We have admitted that physical nature itself is a _product_
[Bogdanov’s italics] of complexes of an immediate character (to which
psychical co-ordinations also belong), that it is the reflection of such
complexes in others, analogous to them, but of the most complex type (in
the socially organised experience of living beings)” (p. 146).

A philosophy which teaches that physical nature itself is a product, is
a philosophy of the priests pure and simple. And its character is in no
wise altered by the fact that personally Bogdanov emphatically
repudiates all religion. Dühring was also an atheist; he even proposed
to prohibit religion in his “socialitarian” order. Nevertheless, Engels
was absolutely right in pointing out that Dühring’s “system” could not
make ends meet without religion.^([1]) The same is true of Bogdanov,
with the essential difference that the quoted passage is not a chance
inconsistency but the very essence of his “empirio-monism” and of all
his “substitution.” If nature is a product, it is obvious that it can be
a product only of some thing that is greater, richer, broader, mightier
than nature, of something that exists; for in order to “produce” nature,
it must exist independently of nature. That means that something exists
_outside_ nature, something which moreover _produces_ nature. In plain
language this is called God. The idealist philosophers have always
sought to change this latter name, to make it more abstract, more vague
and at the same time (for the sake of plausibility) to bring it nearer
to the “psychical,” as an “immediate complex,” as the immediately given
which requires no proof. Absolute Idea, Universal Spirit, World Will,
“_general substitution_” of the psychical for the physical, are
different formulations of one and the same idea. Every man knows, and
science investigates, idea, mind, will, the psychical, as a function of
the normally operating human brain. To divorce this function from
substance organised in a definite way, to convert this function into a
universal, general abstraction, to “substitute” this abstraction for the
whole of physical nature, this is the raving of philosophical idealism
and a mockery of science.

Materialism says that the “socially-organised experience of living
beings” is a product of physical nature, a result of a long development
of the latter, a development from a state of physical nature when no
society, organisation, experience, or living beings existed or could
have existed. Idealism says that physical nature is a product of this
experience of living beings, and in saying this, idealism is equating
(if not subordinating) nature to God. For God is undoubtedly a product
of the socially-organised experience   of living beings. No matter from
what angle you look at it, Bogdanov’s philosophy contains nothing but a
reactionary muddle.

Bogdanov thinks that to speak of the social organisation of experience
is “cognitive socialism” (Bk. III, p. xxxiv). This is insane twaddle. If
socialism is thus regarded, the Jesuits are ardent adherents of
“cognitive socialism,” for the basis of their epistemology is divinity
as “socially-organised experience.” And there can be no doubt that
Catholicism is a socially-organised experience; only, it reflects not
objective truth (which Bogdanov denies, but which science reflects), but
the exploitation of the ignorance of the masses by definite social
classes.

But why speak of the Jesuits! We find Bogdanov’s “cognitive socialism”
in its entirety among the immanentists, so beloved of Mach. Leclair
regards nature as the consciousness of “mankind” _(Der Realismus,_
_etc_., S. 55), and not of the individual. The bourgeois philosophers
will serve you up any amount of such Fichtean cognitive socialism.
Schuppe also emphasises _das generische,_ _das gattungsmässige Moment
des Bewusstseins (Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche
Philosophie,_ Bd. XVII, S. 379-80), _i.e.,_the general, the generic
factor of consciousness. To think that philosophical idealism vanishes
when the consciousness of mankind is substituted for the consciousness
of the individual, or the socially-organised experience for the
experience of one person, is like thinking that capitalism vanishes when
one capitalist is replaced by a joint-stock company.

Our Russian Machians, Yushkevich and Valentinov, echo the materialist
Rakhmetov in asserting that Bogdanov is an idealist (at the same time
foully abusing Rakhmetov himself). But they could not stop to think
where this idealism came from. They make out that Bogdanov is an
individual and chance phenomenon, an isolated case. This is not true.
Bogdanov personally may think that he has invented an “original” system,
but one has only to compare him with the afore mentioned disciples of
Mach to realise the falsity of such an opinion. The difference between
Bogdanov and Cornelius is far less than the difference between Cornelius
and Carus. The difference between Bogdanov and Carus is less (as far as
their philosophical systems are   concerned, of course, and not the
deliberateness of their reactionary implications) than the difference
between Carus and Ziehen, and so on. Bogdanov is only one of the
manifestations of that “socially-organised experience” which testifies
to the growth of Machism into idealism. Bogdanov (we are here, of
course, speaking exclusively of Bogdanov as a philosopher) could not
have come into God’s world had the doctrines of his teacher Mach
contained no “elements”. . . of Berkeleianism. And I cannot imagine a
more “terrible vengeance” on Bogdanov than to have his _Empirio-Monism_
translated, say, into German and presented for review to Leclair and
Schubert-Soldern, Cornelius and Kleinpeter, Carus and Pillon (the French
collaborator and disciple of Renouvier). The compliments that would be
paid by these outright comrades-in-arms and, at times, direct followers
of Mach to the “substitution” would be much more eloquent than their
arguments.

However, it would scarcely be correct to regard Bogdanov’s philosophy as
a finished and static system. In the nine years from 1899 to 1908,
Bogdanov has gone through four stages in his philosophical
peregrinations. At the beginning he was a “natural-historical”
materialist _(i.e.,_ semi-consciously and instinctively faithful to the
spirit of science). His _Fundamental Elements of the Historical Outlook
on Nature_ bears obvious traces of that stage. The second stage was the
“energetics” of Ostwald, which was so fashionable in the latter
nineties, a muddled agnosticism which at times stumbled into idealism.
From Ostwald (the title page of Ostwald’s _Lectures on Natural
Philosophy_ bears the inscription: “Dedicated to E. Mach”) Bogdanov went
over to Mach, that is, he borrowed the fundamental premises of a
subjective idealism that is as inconsistent and muddled as Mach’s entire
philosophy. The fourth stage is an attempt to eliminate some of the
contradictions of Machism, and to create a semblance of objective
idealism. “The theory of general substitution” shows that Bogdanov has
described a curve of almost 180°r; from his starting position. Is this
stage of Bogdanov’s philosophy more remote or less remote from
dialectical materialism than the previous stages? If Bogdanov remains in
one place, then he is, of course, more remote. If he keeps moving along
the same curve in   which he has been moving for the last nine years, he
is less remote. He now has _only_ one serious step to make in order to
return once more to materialism, namely, universally to discard his
whole universal substitution. For this universal substitution gathers
into one Chinese pigtail all the transgressions of half-hearted idealism
and all the weaknesses of consistent subjective idealism, just as _(si
licet parva componere magnis_ !—if it is permissible to compare the
great with the small) Hegel’s “Absolute Idea” gathered together all the
contradictions of Kantian idealism and all the weaknesses of
Fichteanism. Feuerbach had to make only _one_ serious step in order to
return to materialism, namely, universally to discard, absolutely to
eliminate, the Absolute Idea, that Hegelian “substitution of the
psychical” for physical nature. Feuerbach cut off the Chinese pigtail of
philosophical idealism, in other words, he took nature as the basis
without any “substitution” whatever.

We must wait and see whether the Chinese pigtail of Machian idealism
will go on growing for much longer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] See F. Engels, _Anti-Duhring,_ 1959, pp.435-38.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 6. THE 'THEORY OF SYMBOLS' (OR HIEROGLYPHS) AND THE CRITICISM OF HELMHOLTZ


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Four: The Philosophical Idealists as Comrades-In-Arms and Successors of Empirio-Criticism )

6. The “Theory of Symbols” (or Hieroglyphs) and the Criticism of Helmholtz

As a supplement to what has been said above of the idealists as the
comrades-in-arms and successors of empirio-criticism, it will be
appropriate to dwell on the character of the Machian criticism of
certain philosophical propositions touched upon in our literature. For
instance, our Machian would-be Marxists fastened with glee on
Plekhanov’s “hieroglyphs,” that is, on the theory that man’s sensations
and ideas are not copies of real things and processes of nature, not
their images, but conventional signs, symbols, hieroglyphs, and so
on.^([4]) Bazarov ridicules this hieroglyphic materialism; and, it
should be stated, _he would be right_ in doing so if he rejected
hieroglyphic materialism in favour of non-hieroglyphic _materialism_.
But Bazarov here again resorts to a sleight-of-hand and palms off his
renunciation of materialism as a criticism of “hieroglyphism.” Engels
speaks neither of symbols nor of hieroglyphs, but of copies,
photographs, images, mirror-reflections of things. Instead of pointing
out the erroneousness of Plekhanov’s   deviation from Engels’
formulation of materialism, Bazarov uses Plekhanov’s error in order to
conceal Engels’ truth from the reader.

To make clear both Plekhanov’s error and Bazarov’s confusion we shall
refer to an important advocate of the “theory of symbols” (calling a
symbol a hieroglyph changes nothing), Helmholtz, and shall see how he
was criticised by the materialists and by the idealists in conjunction
with the Machians.

Helmholtz, a scientist of the first magnitude, was as inconsistent in
philosophy as are the great majority of scientists. He tended towards
Kantianism, but in his epistemology he did not adhere even to these
views consistently. Here for instance are some passages on the subject
of the correspondance of ideas and objects from his _Handbook of
Physiological Optics_:^([1]) “I have . . . designated sensations as
merely _symbols_ for the relations of the external world and I have
denied that they have any similarity or equivalence to what they
represent” (French translation, p. 579; German original, p. 442). This
is agnosticism, but on the same further on we read: “Our concepts and
ideas are _effects_ wrought on our nervous system and our consciousness
by the objects that are perceived and apprehended.” This is materialism.
But Helmholtz is not clear as to the relation between absolute and
relative truth, as is evident from his subsequent remarks. For
instances, a little further on he says: “I therefore think that there
can be no possible meaning in speaking of the truth of our ideas save as
a _practical_ truth. Our ideas of things _cannot be_ anything but
symbols, naturally given signs for things, which we learn to use in
order to regulate our movements and actions. When we have learned to
read these symbols rightly we are in a position with their aid to direct
our actions so as to achieve the desired result...” This is not correct.
Helmholtz here lapses into subjectivism, into a denial of objective
reality and objective truth. And he arrives at a flagrant untruth when
he concludes the paragraph with the words: “An idea and the object it
represents obviously belong to two entirely different worlds....” Only
the Kantians thus divorce idea from reality, consciousness   from
nature. However, a little further on we read: “As to the properties of
the objects of the external world, a little reflection will show that
all the properties we may attribute to them merely signify the _effects_
wrought by them either on our senses or on other natural objects”
(French ed., p. 581; German original, p. 445; I translate from the
French). Here again Helmholtz reverts to the materialist position.
Helmholtz was an inconsistent Kantian, now recognising _a priori_ laws
of thought, now tending towards the “transcendental reality” of time and
space _(i.e.,_ to a materialist conception of them); now deriving human
sensations from external objects, which act upon our sense organs, and
now declaring sensations to be only symbols, _i.e.,_certain arbitrary
signs divorced from the “entirely different” world of the things
signified _(cf._ Viktor Heyfelder, _Ueber den Begriff der Erfahrung bei
Helmholtz [Helmholtz’s Conception of Experience],_ Berlin 1897).

This is how Helmholtz expressed his views in a speech delivered in 1878
on “Facts in Perception” (“a noteworthy pronouncement from the realistic
camp,” as Leclair characterised this speech): “Our sensations are indeed
effects wrought by external causes in our organs, and the manner in
which such effects manifest themselves, of course, depends very
essentially on the nature of the apparatus on which these effects are
wrought. Inasmuch as the quality of our sensation informs us of the
properties of the external action by which this sensation is produced,
the latter can be regarded as its _sign (Zeichen),_ but not as its
_image_. For a certain resemblance to the object imaged is demanded of
an image. . . . But a sign need not resemble that of which it is a sign.
. .” _(Vorträge und Reden [Lectures and Speeches],_ 1884, Bd. II, S.
226). If sensations are not images of things, but only signs or symbols
which do “not resemble” them, then Helmholtz’s initial materialist
premise is undermined; the existence of external objects becomes subject
to doubt; for signs or symbols may quite possibly indicate imaginary
objects, and everybody is familiar with instances of _such_ signs or
symbols. Helmholtz, following Kant, attempts to draw something like an
absolute boundary between the “phenomenon” and the “thing-in itself.”
Helmholtz harbours an insuperable prejudice against straightforward,
clear, and open materialism. But a little further on he says: “I do not
see how one could refute   a system even of the most extreme subjective
idealism that chose to regard life as a dream. One might declare it to
be highly improbable and unsatisfactory—I myself would in this case
subscribe to the severest expressions of dissent—yet it could be
constructed consistently. . . . The realistic hypothesis, on the
contrary, trusts the evidence _(Aussage)_ of ordinary self-observation,
according to which the changes of perception that follow a certain
action have no psychical connection with the preceding impulse of
volition. This hypothesis regards everything that seems to be
substantiated by our everyday perception, _viz_., the material world
outside of us, as existing independently of our ideas.” (pp. 242-43.)
“Undoubtedly, the realistic hypothesis is the simplest we can construct;
it has been tested and verified in an extremely broad field of
application; it is sharply defined in its several parts and, therefore,
it is in the highest degree useful and fruitful as a basis of action”
(p. 243). Helmholtz’s agnosticism also resembles “shamefaced
materialism,” with certain Kantian twists, in distinction to Huxley’s
Berkeleian twists.

Albrecht Rau, a follower of Feuerbach, therefore vigorously criticises
Helmholtz’s theory of symbols as an inconsistent deviation from
“realism.” Helmholtz’s basic view, says Rau, is a realistic hypothesis,
according to which “we apprehend the objective properties of things with
the help of our senses”.^([2]) The theory of symbols cannot be
reconciled with such a view (which, as we have seen, is wholly
materialist), for it implies a certain distrust of perception, a
distrust of the evidence of our sense-organs. It is beyond doubt that an
image cannot wholly resemble the model, but an image is one thing, a
symbol, a _conventional sign,_ another. The image inevitably and of
necessity implies the objective reality of that which it “images.”
“Conventional sign,” symbol, hieroglyph are concepts which introduce an
entirely unnecessary element of agnosticism. Albrecht Rau, therefore, is
perfectly right in saying that Helmholtz’s theory of symbols pays
tribute to Kantianism. “Had Helmholtz,” says Rau, “remained true to his
realistic conception, had he consistently adhered to the basic principle
that the   properties of bodies express the relations of bodies to each
other and also to us, he obviously would have had no need of the whole
theory of symbols; he could then have said, briefly and clearly: the
sensations which are produced in us by things are reflections of the
nature of those things” _(ibid_., p. 320).

That is the way a materialist criticises Helmholtz. He rejects
Helmholtz’s hieroglyphic or symbolic materialism or semi-materialism in
favour of Feuerbach’s consistent materialism.

The idealist Leclair (a representative of the “immanentist school,” so
dear to Mach’s heart and mind) also accuses Helmholtz of inconsistency,
of wavering between materialism and spiritualism. _(Der Realismus,_
_etc_., S. 154.) But for Leclair the theory of symbols is not
insufficiently materialistic but too materialistic. Leclair says:
“Helmholtz thinks that the perceptions of our consciousness offer
sufficient support for the cognition of sequence in time as well as of
the identity or non-identity of transcendental causes. This in
Helmholtz’s opinion is sufficient for the assumption and cognition of
law in the realm of the transcendental” _(i.e.,_ in the realm of the
objectively real) (p. 33). And Leclair thunders against this “dogmatic
prejudice of Helmholtz’s”: “Berkeley’s God,” he exclaims, “as the
hypothetical cause of _the conformity to natural law_ of the ideas in
our mind is at least just as capable of satisfying our need of causality
as a world of external objects” (p. 31). “A consistent application of
the theory of symbols. . . can achieve nothing without a generous
admixture of vulgar realism” _(i.e.,_ materialism) (p. 35).

This is how a “critical idealist” criticised Helmholtz for his
materialism in 1879. Twenty years later, in his article “The Fundamental
Views of Ernst Mach and Heinrich Hertz on Physics,”^([3]) Kleinpeter,
the disciple of Mach so highly praised by his teacher, refuted in the
following way the “antiquated” Helmholtz with the aid of Mach’s “recent”
philosophy. Let us for the moment leave aside Hertz (who, in fact, was
as inconsistent as Helmholtz) and examine Kleinpeter’s   comparison of
Mach and Helmholtz. Having quoted a number of passages from the works of
both writers, and having particularly stressed Mach’s well-known
statements to the effect that bodies are mental symbols for complexes of
sensations and so on, Kleinpeter says:

“If we follow Helmholtz’s line of thought, we shall encounter the
following fundamental premises:

“1) There exist objects of the external world.

“2) A change in these objects is inconceivable without the action of
some cause (which is thought of as real).

“3) ‘Cause, according to the original meaning of the word, is the
unchangeable residue or being behind the changing phenomena, namely,
substance and the law of its action, force.’ [The quotation is taken by
Kleinpeter from Helmholtz.]

“4)It is possible to deduce all phenomena from their causes in a
logically strict and uniquely determined manner.

“5)The achievement of this end is equivalent to the possession of
objective truth, the acquisition _(Erlangung)_ of which is thus regarded
as conceivable” (p. 163).

Rendered indignant by these premises, by their contradictoriness and
their creation of insoluble problems, Kleinpeter remarks that Helmholtz
does not hold strictly to these views and sometimes employs “turns of
speech which are somewhat suggestive of Mach’s purely logical
understanding of such words” as matter, force, causality, etc.

“It is not difficult to find the source of our dissatisfaction with
Helmholtz, if we recall Mach’s fine, clear words. The false
understanding of the words mass, force, etc., is the basic weakness of
Helmholtz’s whole argument. These are only concepts, products of our
imagination and not realities existing outside of thought. We are not
even in a position to know such things. From the observation of our
senses we are in general unable, owing to their imperfection, to make
even a single uniquely determined conclusion. We can never assert, for
instance, that upon reading a certain scale _(durch Ablesen einer
Skala)_ we shall obtain a definite figure: there are always, within
certain limits, an infinite number of possible figures all equally
compatible with the facts of the observation. And to have knowledge of
something real lying outside us—that is for us impossible. Let us
assume, however, that it were possible, and that we did get to know  
reality; in that case we would have no right to apply the laws of logic
to it, for they are _our_ laws, applicable only to our conceptions, to
_our_ mental products [Kleinpeter’s italics]. Between facts there is no
logical connection, but only a simple succession; apodictic assertions
are here unthinkable. It is therefore incorrect to say that one fact is
the cause of another and, consequently, the whole deduction built up by
Helmholtz on this conception falls to the ground. Finally, the
attainment of objective truth, _i.e.,_truth existing independently of
any subject, is impossible, not only because of the nature of our
senses, but also because as men _(als Menschen)_ we can in general have
no notion of what exists quite independently of us (p. 164).

As the reader sees, our disciple of Mach, repeating the favourite
phrases of his teacher and of Bogdanov, who does not own himself a
Machian, rejects Helmholtz’s whole philosophy, rejects it from the
idealist standpoint. The theory of symbols is not even especially
singled out by the idealist, who regards it as an unimportant and
perhaps accidental deviation from materialism. And Helmholtz is chosen
by Kleinpeter as a representative of the “traditional views in physics,”
“views shared to this day by the majority of phys icists” (p. 160).

The result we have arrived at is that Plekhanov was guilty of an obvious
mistake in his exposition of materialism, but that Bazarov completely
muddled the matter, mixed up materialism with idealism and advanced in
opposition to the “theory of symbols,” or “hieroglyphic materialism,”
the idealist nonsense that “sense-perception is the reality existing out
side us.” From the Kantian Helmholtz, just as from Kant himself, the
materialists went to the Left, the Machians to the Right.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] Helmholtz, _Handbuch der physiologischen Optik_.—_Ed_.

[2] Albrecht Rau, _Empfinden und Denken [Sensation and Thought],_
Giessen, 1896, S. 304. —_Lenin_

[3] _Archiv für Philosophie_,^([5]) II, _Systematische Philosophie,_ Bd.
V., 1899, S. 163-64. —_Lenin_

[4] In Geneva in 1892 appeared the first Russian edition of Engels’ work
_Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy,_
translated by G. V. Plokhanov and with a foreword and notes by him.
Commenting on Engels’ formulation of the fundamental question of
philosophy and characterisation of agnosticism, Plekhanov gave a
critical exposition of the theory of knowledge of a number of trends of
idealist philosophy (Hume, Kant, the neo-Kantians, etc.) and
counterposed to them the materialist theory of knowledge, in doing so he
committed an error by saying:

“Our sensations are in their way hieroglyphs which inform us of what is
taking place in reality. The hieroglyphs do not resemble the events
convoyed by them. But they can _with complete fidelity_ convey both the
events themselves, and—what is the main thing—the relations existing
between them” (G. V. Plekhanov, _Selected Philosophical Works,_ Vol. 1,
Moscow, p. 536). In 1905, in the notes to the second edition of Engels’
work, Plekhanov admitted: “I also failed to express myself quite
exactly” (ibid., p. 545). Plekhanov’s error, although appearing to be a
question of terminology, was a concession to agnosticism and bore
witness to his insufficiently profound understanding of the dialectics
of the process of cognition.

[5] _Archiv für Philosophie (Philosophical Archives)_—a German
philosophical journal of an idealist tendency, organ of the neo-Kantians
and Machists. It was published in Berlin from 1895 to 1931 in two
parallel editions: the first, entitled _Archiv für Geschichte der
Philosophie (Archives of the History of Philosophy)_ was edited by L.
Stein; the second, entitled _Archiv für systemsatische Philosaphic
(Archives of Systematic Philosophy),_ was edited by Paul Natorp. From
1925 the journal appeared under the title of _Archiv für systematische
Philosophie und Soziologic (Archives of Systematic Philosophy and
Sociology)._

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 7. TWO KINDS OF CRITICISM OF DÜHRING


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Four: The Philosophical Idealists as Comrades-In-Arms and Successors of Empirio-Criticism )

7. Two Kinds of Criticism of Dühring

Let us note another characteristic feature in the Machians’ incredible
perversion of materialism. Valentinov endeavours to beat the Marxists by
comparing them to Büchner, who supposedly has much in common with
Plekhanov, although Engels sharply dissociated himself from Buchner.
Bogdanov, approaching the same question from another angle,   defends,
as it were, the “materialism of the natural scientists,” which, he says,
“is usually spoken of with a certain contempt” _(Empirio-Monism,_ Bk.
III, p. x). Both Valentinov and Bogdanov are wretchedly muddled on this
question. Marx and Engels always “spoke contemptuously” of bad
socialists; but from this it follows that they demanded the teaching of
correct socialism, scientific socialism, and not a flight from socialism
to bourgeois views. Marx and Engels always condemned _bad_ (and,
particularly, anti-dialectical) materialism; but they condemned it from
the standpoint of a higher, more advanced dialectical _materialism,_ and
not from the standpoint of Humism or Berkeleianism. Marx, Engels and
Dietzgen would discuss the bad materialists, reason with them and seek
to correct their errors. But they would not even discuss the Humeans and
Berkeleians, Mach and Avenarius, confining themselves to a single still
more contemptuous remark about their trend _as a whole_. Therefore, the
endless faces and grimaces made by our Machians over Holbach and Co.,
Büchner and Co., etc., are absolutely nothing but an attempt to throw
dust in the eyes of the public, a cover for the departure of Machism as
a whole from the very foundations of materialism in general, and a fear
to take up a straightforward and clear position with regard to Engels.

And it would be hard to express oneself more clearly on the French
materialism of the eighteenth century and on Büchner, Vogt and
Moleschott, than Engels does at the end of Chapter II of his _Ludwig
Feuerbach_. It is impossible not to understand Engels, unless one
deliberately wishes to distort him. Marx and I are materialists—says
Engels in this chapter, explaining what _fundamentally_ distinguishes
all schools of materialism from _the whole camp_ of the idealists, from
all the Kantians and Humeans in general. And Engels _reproaches
Feuerbach for a certain pusillanimity,_ a certain frivolity of thought,
as expressed in his rejection at times of materialism in general because
of the mistakes of one or another school of materialists. Feuerbach
“should not have confounded the doctrines of these hedge-preachers
[Büchner and Co.] with materialism in general,”^([2]) says Engels (p.
21). Only minds that are spoilt by reading and credulously accepting the
doctrines of the German reactionary professors   could have
_misunderstood_ the nature of such reproaches levelled by Engels at
Feuerbach.

Engels says very clearly that Büchner and Co. “by no means overcame the
limitations of their teachers,” _i.e.,_the materialists of the
eighteenth century, that they had not made a single _step forward_. And
it is for this, and _this alone,_ that Engels took Büchner and Co. to
task; not for their materialism, as the ignoramuses think, but because
they did not _advance_ materialism, because “_it was quite outside their
scope to develop the theory_ [of materialism] _any further_.” It was for
this alone that Engels took Büchner and Co. to task. And thereupon point
by point Engels enumerates three fundamental “limitations”
_(Beschränktheit)_ of the French materialists of the eighteenth century,
from which Marx and Engels had emancipated themselves, but from which
Büchner and Co. were unable to emancipate themselves. The first
limitation was that the views of the old materialists were “mechanical,”
_in the sense_ that they believed in “the exclusive application of the
standards of mechanics to processes of a chemical and organic nature”
(p. 19). We shall see in the next chapter that failure to understand
these words of Engels’ caused certain people to succumb to idealism
through the new physics. Engels does not reject _mechanical_ materialism
for the faults attributed to it by physicists of the “recent” idealist
(alias Machian) trend. The second limitation was the metaphysical
character of the views of the old materialists, meaning the
“_anti-dialectical character of their philosophy_.” This limitation is
fully shared with Büchner and Co. by our Machians, who, as we have seen,
entirely failed to understand Engels’ application of dialectics to
epistemology (for example, absolute and relative truth). The third
limitation was the preservation of idealism “up above,” in the realm of
the social sciences, a non-understanding of historical materialism.

Having enumerated these three “limitations” and explained them with
exhaustive clarity (pp. 19-21), Engels _then and there_ adds that they
(Büchner and Co.) did not emerge “_from these limits_” _(über diese
Schranken)_.

_Exclusively_ for these three things and exclusively within these
limits, does Engels refute both the materialism of the eighteenth
century and the doctrines of Büchner and Co.!   On all other, more
elementary, questions of materialism (questions distorted by the
Machians) _there is and can be no difference_ between Marx and Engels on
the one hand and all these old materialists on the other. It was only
the Russian Machians who brought confusion into this perfectly clear
question, since for their West-European teachers and co-thinkers the
radical difference between the line of Mach and his friends and the line
of the materialists generally is perfectly obvious. Our Machians found
it necessary to confuse the issue in order to represent their break with
Marxism and their desertion to the camp of bourgeois philosophy as
“minor corrections” of Marxism!

Take Dühring. It is hard to imagine anything more contemptuous than the
opinion of him expressed by Engels. But _at the same time that Dühring
was criticised by Engels,_ just see _how he was criticised by Leclair,_
who praises Mach’s “revolutionising philosophy.” Leclair regards Dühring
as the “_extreme Left_” of materialism, which “without any evasion
declares sensation, as well as every activity of consciousness and
intelligence in general, to be the secretion, function, supreme flower,
aggregate effect, etc., of the animal organism” _(Der Realismus,_
_etc_., 1879, S. 23-24).

Is it for this that Engels criticised Dühring? No. In this he was in
_full agreement_ with Dühring, as he was with every other materialist.
He criticised Dühring from the diametrically opposite standpoint,
namely, for the inconsistency of his materialism, for his idealist
fancies, which left a loophole for fideism.

“Nature itself works both within ideating beings and from without, in
order to create the required knowledge of the course of things by
systematically producing coherent views.” Leclair quotes these words of
Dühring’s and savagely attacks the materialism of such a point of view,
the “crude metaphysics” of this materialism, the “self-deception,” etc.,
etc. (pp. 160 and 161-63).

Is it for this that Engels criticised Dühring? No. He ridiculed all
florid language, but as regards the cognition of objective law in
nature, reflected by the consciousness, _Engels was fully in agreement
with Dühring,_ as he was with every other materialist.

“Thought is a form of reality higher than the rest. . . . A fundamental
premise is the independence and distinction of the materially real world
from the groups of manifestations of the consciousness.” Leclair quotes
these words of Dühring’s together with a number of Dühring’s attacks on
Kant, etc., and for this accuses Dühring of “metaphysics” (pp. 218-22),
of subscribing to “a metaphysical dogma,” etc.

Is it for this that Engels criticised Dühring? No. That the world exists
independently of the mind and that every deviation from this truth on
the part of the Kantians, Humeans, Berkeleians, and so forth, is false,
on this point Engels was fully in agreement with Dühring, as he was with
every other materialist. Had Engels seen _from what angle_ Leclair, in
the spirit of Mach, criticised Dühring, he would have called both these
philosophical reactionaries names _a hundred times_ more contemptuous
than those he called Dühring. To Leclair Dühring was the incarnation of
pernicious realism and materialism _(cf_. also _Beiträge zu einer
monistischen Erkenntnistheorie,_ 1882, S. 45). In 1878, W. Schuppe,
teacher and comrade-in-arms of Mach, accused Dühring of “visionary
realism” _(Traumrealismus)_^([1]) in revenge for the epithet “visionary
idealism” which Dühring had hurled against all idealists. For Engels,
_on the contrary,_ Dühring was _not a sufficiently_ steadfast, clear and
consistent materialist.

Marx and Engels, as well as J. Dietzgen, entered the philosophical arena
at a time when materialism reigned among the advanced intellectuals in
general, and in working-class circles in particular. It is therefore
quite natural that they should have devoted their attention not to a
repetition of old ideas but to a serious theoretical _development_ of
materialism, its application to history, in other words, to the
_completion_ of the edifice of materialist philosophy _up to its
summit_. It is quite natural that in the sphere of epistemology they
_confined_ themselves to correcting Feuerbach’s errors, to ridiculing
the banalities of the materialist Dühring, to criticising the errors of
Büchner (see J. Dietzgen), to emphasising what these most widely known
and popular writers   among the workers _particularly_ lacked, namely,
dialectics. Marx, Engels and J. Dietzgen did not worry about the
elementary truths of materialism, which had been cried by the hucksters
in dozens of books, but devoted all their attention to ensuring that
these elementary truths should not be vulgarised, should not be
over-simplified, should not lead to stagnation of thought (“materialism
below, idealism above”), to forgetfulness of the _valuable_ fruit of the
idealist systems, Hegelian dialectics—that pearl which those farmyard
cocks, the Büchners, the Dührings and Co. (as well as Leclair, Mach,
Avenarius and so forth), could not pick out from the dungheap of
absolute idealism.

If one envisages at all concretely the historical conditions in which
the philosophical works of Engels and J. Dietzgen were written, it will
be perfectly clear why they were _more concerned to dissociate_
themselves from the vulgarisation of the elementary truths of
materialism than to _defend_ the truths themselves. Marx and Engels were
similarly more concerned to dissociate themselves from the vulgarisation
of the fundamental demands of political democracy than to defend these
demands.

Only disciples of the philosophical reactionaries could have “failed to
notice” this circumstance, and could have presented the case to their
readers in such a way as to make it appear that Marx and Engels did not
know what being a materialist means.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] Dr. Wilhelm Schuppe, _Erkenntnistheoretische Logik [Epistemological
Logic],_ Bonn, 1878, S. 56. —_Lenin_

[2] See K. Marx and F. Engels, _Selected Works,_ Vol. II, Moscow, 1958,
p. 375.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 8. HOW COULD J. DIETZGEN HAVE FOUND FAVOUR WITH THE REACTIONARY PHILOSOPHERS?


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Four: The Philosophical Idealists as Comrades-In-Arms and Successors of Empirio-Criticism )

8. How Could J. Dietzgen Have Found Favour with the Reactionary Philosophers?

The previously cited example of Helfond already contains the answer to
this question, and we shall not examine the innumerable instances in
which J. Dietzgen receives Helfond like treatment at the hands of our
Machians. It is more expedient to quote a number of passages from J.
Dietzgen himself in order to bring out his weak points.^([1])

“Thought is a function of the brain,” says Dietzgen _(Das Wesen der
menschlichen Kopfarbeit,_ 1903, S. 52; there is a Russian translation).
“Thought is a product of the brain. . . . My desk, as the content of my
thought, is identical with that thought, does not differ from it. But my
desk outside   of my head is a separate object quite distinct from it”
(p. 53). These perfectly clear materialistic propositions are, however,
supplemented by Dietzgen thus: “Nevertheless, the non-sensible idea is
also sensible, material, _i.e.,_real. . . . The mind differs no more
from the table, light, or sound than these things differ from each
other” (p. 54). This is obviously false. That both thought and matter
are “real,” _i.e.,_exist, is true. But to say that thought is material
is to make a false step, a step towards confusing materialism and
idealism. As a matter of fact this is only an inexact expression of
Dietzgen’s, who elsewhere correctly says: “Mind and matter at least have
this in common, that they exist” (p. 80). “Thinking,” says Dietzgen, “is
a work of the body. . . . In order to think I require a substance that
can be thought of. This substance is provided in the phenomena of nature
and life. . . . Matter is the boundary of the mind, beyond which the
latter cannot pass. . . . Mind is a product of matter, but matter is
more than a product of mind. . .” (p. 64). The Machians refrain from
analysing materialist arguments of the materialist Dietzgen such as
these! They prefer to fasten on passages where he is inexact and
muddled. For example, he says that scientists can be “idealists only
outside their field” (p. 108). Whether this is so, and why it is so, on
this the Machians are silent. But a page or so earlier Dietzgen
recognises the “positive side of modern idealism” (p. 106) and the
“inadequacy of the materialist principle,” which should rejoice the
Machians. The incorrectly expressed thought of Dietzgen’s consists in
the fact that the difference between matter and mind is also _relative
and not excessive_ (p. 107). This is true, but what follows from this is
not that materialism as such is inadequate, but that metaphysical,
anti-dialectical materialism is inadequate.

“Simple, scientific truth is not based on a person. It has its
foundation outside [_i.e._, of the person], in its material; it is
objective truth. . . . We call ourselves materialists. . . .
Philosophical materialists are distinguished by the fact that they put
the corporeal world at the beginning, at the head, and put the idea, or
spirit, as the sequel, whereas their opponents, after the manner of
religion, derive things from the word. . . the material world from the
idea” _(Kleinere philosophische Schriften,_ 1903, S. 59, 62). The
Machians avoid this recognition of objective truth and repetition of
_Engels’_   definition of materialism. But Dietzgen goes on to say: “We
would be equally right in calling ourselves idealists, for our system is
based on the total result of philosophy, on the scientific investigation
of the idea, on a clear insight into the nature of mind” (p. 63). It is
not difficult to seize upon this obviously incorrect phrase in order to
deny materialism. Actually, Dietzgen’s formulation is more inexact than
his basic thought, which amounts to this, that the old materialism was
unable to investigate ideas scientifically (with the aid of historical
materialism).

Here are Dietzgen’s ideas on the old materialism. “Like our
understanding of political economy, our materialism is a scientific,
historical conquest. Just as definitely as we distinguish ourselves from
the socialists of the past, so we distinguish ourselves from the old
materialists. With the latter we have only this in common, that we
acknowledge matter to be the premise, or prime base of the idea” (p.
140). This word “only” is significant! It contains the _whole_
epistemological foundation of materialism, _as distinguished from_
agnosticism, Machism, idealism. But Dietzgen’s attention is here
concentrated on dissociating himself from vulgar materialism.

But then follows a little further on a passage that is quite incorrect:
“The concept matter must be broadened. It embraces all the phenomena of
reality, as well as our faculty of knowing or explaining” (p. 141). This
is a muddle which can only lead to confusing materialism and idealism
under the guise of “broadening” the former. To seize upon this
“broadening” would be to forget the _basis_ of Dietzgen’s philosophy,
the recognition of matter as the primary, “the boundary of the mind.”
But, as a matter of fact, a few lines further down Dietzgen corrects
himself: “The whole governs the part, matter the mind. . . . In this
sense we may love and honour the material world . . . as the first
cause, as the creator of heaven and earth” (p. 142). That the conception
of “matter” must also include thoughts, as Dietzgen repeats in the
_Excursions_ (op. cit., p. 214), is a muddle, for if such an inclusion
is made, the epistemological contrast between mind and matter, idealism
and materialism, a contrast upon which Dietzgen himself insists, loses
all meaning. That this contrast must not be made “excessive,”
exaggerated, metaphysical,   is beyond dispute (and it is to the great
credit of the _dialectical_ materialist Dietzgen that he emphasised
this). The limits of the absolute necessity and absolute truth of this
relative contrast are precisely those limits which define the _trend_ of
epistemological investigations. To operate beyond these limits with the
distinction between matter and mind, physical and mental, as though they
were absolute opposites, would be a great mistake.

Dietzgen, unlike Engels, expresses his thoughts in a vague, unclear,
mushy way. But apart from his defects of exposition and his individual
mistakes, he not unsuccessfully champions the “_materialist theory of
knowledge_” (pp. 222 and 271), “_dialectical materialism_” (p. 224).
“The materialist theory of knowledge then,” says Dietzgen, “amounts to
the recognition that the human organ of perception radiates no
metaphysical light, but is a piece of nature which reflects other pieces
of nature” (pp. 222-23). “Our perceptive faculty is not a supernatural
source of truth, but a mirror-like instrument, which reflects the things
of the world, or nature” (p. 243). Our profound Machians avoid an
analysis of each individual proposition of Dietzgen’s _materialist
theory of knowledge,_ but seize upon his _deviations_ from that theory,
upon his vagueness and confusion. J. Dietzgen could find favour with the
reactionary philosophers only because he occasionally gets muddled. And,
it goes without saying, where there is a muddle there you will find
Machians.

Marx wrote to Kugelmann on December 5, 1868: “A fairly long time ago he
[Dietzgen] sent me a fragment of a manuscript on the ‘faculty of
thought’ which in spite of a certain confusion and of too frequent
repetition, contains much that is excellent and—as the independent
product of a working man—admirable” (Russian translation., p. 53).^([2])
Mr. Valentinov quotes this opinion, but _it never dawned on him to ask
what_ Marx regarded as Dietzgen’s _confusion,_ whether it was that which
brings Dietzgen close to Mach, or that which distinguishes Dietzgen from
Mach. Mr. Valentinov does not ask this question because he read both
Dietzgen and Marx’s letters after the manner of Gogol’s Petrushka. Yet
it is not difficult to find the answer to this question. Marx frequently
called his world outlook dialectical materialism, and Engels’
_Anti-Dühring,_ _the whole of which Marx read through in_  
_manuscript,_ expounds precisely this world outlook. Hence, it should
have been clear even to the Valentinovs that Dietzgen’s _confusion_
could lie only in _his deviation_ from a consistent application of
dialectics, from consistent _materialism,_ in particular from
_Anti-Dühring_.

Does it now dawn upon Mr. Valentinov and his brethren that what Marx
could call Dietzgen’s confusion is _only what brings Dietzgen close to
Mach,_ who went from Kant not towards materialism, but towards Berkeley
and Hume? Or was it that the materialist Marx called Dietzgen’s
materialist theory of knowledge confused, yet approved his deviations
from materialism, that is, approved what differs from _Anti-Dühring,_
which was written with his (Marx’s) participation?

Whom are they trying to fool, our Machians, who desire to be regarded as
Marxists and at the same time inform the world that “_their_” Mach
approved of Dietzgen? Have our heroes failed to guess that Mach could
approve in Dietzgen only that which Marx called confusion?

But taken as a whole, J. Dietzgen does not deserve so severe a censure.
He is nine-tenths a materialist and never made any claims either to
originality or to possessing a special philosophy distinct from
materialism. He spoke of Marx frequently, and invariably as the _head of
the trend (Kleinere philosophische Schriften,_ S. 4—an opinion uttered
in 1873; on page 95—1876—he emphasises that Marx and Engels “possessed
the necessary philosophical training”; on page 181—1886—he speaks of
Marx and Engels as the “acknowledged founders” of the trend). Dietzgen
was a Marxist, and Eugene Dietzgen, and—alasl—Comrade P. Dauge are
rendering him left-handed service by their invention of “Naturmonismus,”
“Dietzgenism,” etc. “Dietzgenism” as distinct from dialectical
materialism is _confusion,_ a _step_ towards reactionary philosophy, an
attempt to create a trend not from what is great in Joseph Dietzgen (and
in that worker-philosopher, who discovered dialectical materialism in
his own way, there is much that is great!) but _from his weak points_.

I shall confine myself to two examples in order to illustrate how
Comrade P. Dauge and Eugene Dietzgen are sliding into reactionary
philosophy.

In the second edition of the _Akquisit_^([3]) (p. 273), Dauge writes:
“Even bourgeois criticism points out the connection between Dietzgen’s
philosophy and empirio-criticism and also the immanentist school,” and,
further on, “especially Leclair” (a quotation from a “bourgeois
criticism”).

That P. Dauge values and esteems J. Dietzgen cannot be doubted. But it
also cannot be doubted that he is _defaming_ him by citing _without
protest_ the opinion of a bourgeois scribbler who classes the sworn
enemy of fideism and of the professors—the “graduated flunkeys” of the
bourgeoisie—with the outspoken preacher of fideism and avowed
reactionary, Leclair. It is possible that Dauge repeated another’s
opinion of the immanentists and of Leclair without himself being
familiar with the writings of these reactionaries. But let this serve
him as a warning: the road _away from_ Marx to the peculiarities of
Dietzgen—to Mach—to the immanentists—is a road leading into a morass. To
class him not only with Leclair but even with Mach is to lay stress on
Dietzgen the muddlehead as distinct from Dietzgen the materialist.

I shall defend Dietzgen against Dauge. I assert that Dietzgen did not
deserve the shame of being classed with Leclair. And I can cite a
witness, a most authoritative one on such a question, one who is as much
a reactionary, as much a fideist and “immanentist” philosopher as
Leclair himself, namely, Schubert-Soldern. In 1896 he wrote: “The
Social-Democrats willingly lean for support on Hegel with more or less
(usually less) justification, but they materialise the Hegelian
philosophy; _cf_. J. Dietzgen. . . . With Dietzgen, the absolute becomes
the universal, and this becomes the thing-in-itself, the absolute
subject, whose appearances are its predicates. That he [Dietzgen] is
thus converting a pure abstraction into the basis of the concrete
process, he does not, of course, realise any more than Hegel himself
did. . . . He frequently chaotically lumps together Hegel, Darwin,
Haeckel, and natural-scientific materialism” _(Die soziale Frage,_ S.
xxxiii). Schubert-Soldern is a keener judge of philosophical shades than
Mach, who praises everybody indiscriminately, including the Kantian
Jerusalem.

Eugene Dietzgen was so simple-minded as to complain to the German public
that in Russia the narrow materialists   had “insulted” Joseph Dietzgen,
and he translated Plekhanov’s and Dauge’s articles on Joseph Dietzgen
into German. (See Joseph Dietzgen, _Erkenntnis und Wahrheit [Knowledge
and Truth],_ Stuttgart, 1908, Appendix). The poor “Natur-monist’s”
complaint rebounded on his own head. Franz Mehring, who may be regarded
as knowing something of philosophy and Marxism, wrote in his review that
Plekhanov was essentially right as against Dauge _(Die Neue Zeit,_ 1908,
No. 38, 19. Juni, Feuilleton, S. 432). That J. Dietzgen _got into
difficulties_ when he _deviated_ from Marx and Engels (p. 431) is for
Mehring beyond question. Eugene Dietzgen replied to Mehring in a long,
snivelling note, in which he went so far as to say that J. Dietzgen
might be of service “in reconciling” the “warring brothers, the orthodox
and the revisionists” _(Die Neue Zeit,_ 1908, No. 44, 31. Juli, S. 652).

Another warning, Comrade Dauge: the road away from Marx to “Dietzgenism”
and “Machism” is a _road into the morass,_ not for individuals, not for
Tom, Dick and Harry, but for the trend.

And do not complain, Messrs. Machians, that I quote the “authorities”;
your objections to the authorities are but a screen for the fact that
for the socialist authorities (Marx, Engels, Lafargue, Mehring, Kautsky)
you are substituting bourgeois _authorities_ (Mach, Petzoldt, Avenarius
and the immanentists). You would do better not to raise the question of
“authorities” and “authoritarianism”!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

Notes

[1] The Institute of Marxism-Leninism has in its archives a copy of
Joseph Dietzgen’s book _Kietnere philosophische Sebriften. Eine Aoswohl
(Minor Philosophical Writings. A Selection),_ Stuttgart, Dietz, 1903,
with annotations by Lenin. The book includes seven articles published in
1870-78 in the newspapers _Volksstaat (People’s State)_ and _Vorwarts
(Forward)_ as well as a work entitled _Strcifzuge eines Solzialisten in
das Gebiet der Erkenntnistheorie (Excursions of a Socialist in the Field
of the Theory of Knowledge),_ which was published in 1887 as a separate
pamphlet.

Most of Lenin’s annotations were made while he was working on the book
_Materialism and Empirio-criticism._ They consist of under linings and
remarks in the text and on the margins; in several cases Lenin marks
correct ideas of Dietzgen’s with the letter “_a_” and departures from
dialectical materialism with the letter “B”. Lenin’s annotations bring
into prominence Dietzgen’s description of the partisan character of
philosophy, the relations between philosophy and natural science, the
subject-matter of philosophy, the fundamental philosophical categories,
the problem of the cognisability of the world, the appraisal of Kant,
Hegel and Feuerbach, the attitude to Marx and Engels, and Dietzgen’s
militant atheism. At the same time Lenin notes Dietzgen’s confusion in
regard to philosophical categories, his attempt to “widen” the concept
of matter by including in it “all the phenomena of reality, hence also
our cognitive ability”, etc. p.

[2] Lenin is referring to _Letters of Karl Marx to Kugelmann, Member of
the International,_ St. Petersburg, 1907 (see K. Marx, _Briefe an
Kugelmann,_ Inoidat, 1940).

[3] P. Dauge wrote an afterword entitled “Joseph Dietzgen and His
Critic, G. Plekhanov” to the second Russian edition of Joseph Dietzgen’s
_Akqaisit der Philosophie._

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 1. THE CRISIS IN MODERN PHYSICS


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

Chapter Five: The Recent Revolution in Natural Science and Philosophical Idealism

A year ago, in _Die Neue Zeit_ (1906–07, No. 52), there appeared an
article by Joseph Diner-Dénes entitled “Marxism and the Recent
Revolution in the Natural Sciences.” The defect of this article is that
it ignores the epistemological conclusions which are being drawn from
the “new” physics and in which we are especially interested at present.
But it is precisely this defect which renders the point of view and the
conclusions of the author particularly interesting for us. Joseph
Diner-Dénes, like the present writer, holds the view of the
“rank-and-file Marxist,” of whom our Machians speak with such haughty
contempt. For instance, Mr. Yushkevich writes that “ordinarily, the
average rank-and-file Marxist calls himself a dialectical materialist”
(p. 1 of his book). And now this rank-and-file Marxist, in the person of
J. Diner-Dénes, has _directly_ compared the recent discoveries in
science, and especially in physics (X-rays, Becquerel rays, radium,
etc.^([1])), with Engels’ _Anti-Dühring_. To what conclusion has this
comparison led him? “In the most varied fields of natural science,”
writes Diner-Dénes, “new knowledge has been acquired, all of which tends
towards that single point which Engels desired to make clear, namely,
that in nature ‘there are no irreconcilable contradictions, no forcibly
fixed boundary lines and distinctions,’ and that if contradictions and
distinctions are met with in nature, it is because we alone have
introduced their rigidity and absoluteness into nature.” It was
discovered, for instance, that light and electricity   are only
manifestations of one and the same force of nature.[2] Each day it
becomes more probable that chemical affinity may be reduced to
electrical processes. The indestructible and non-disintegrable elements
of chemistry, whose number continues to grow as though in derision of
the unity of the world, now prove to be destructible and disintegrable.
The element radium has been converted into the element helium.^([3])
“Just as all the forces of nature have been reduced to one force, so all
substances in nature have been reduced to _one substance_” (Diner-Dénes’
italics). Quoting the opinion of one of the writers who regard the atom
as only a condensation of the ether,^([4]) the author exclaims: “How
brilliantly does this confirm the statement made by Engels thirty years
ago that motion is the mode of existence of matter.” “All phenomena of
nature are motion, and the differences between them lie only in the fact
that we human beings perceive this motion in different forms. . . . It
is as Engels said. Nature, like history, is subject to the dialectical
law of motion.”

On the other hand, you cannot take up any of the writings of the
Machians or about Machism without encountering pretentious references to
the new physics, which is said to have refuted materialism, and so on
and so forth. Whether these assertions are well-founded is another
question, but the connection between the new physics, or rather a
definite school of the new physics, and Machism and other varieties of
modern idealist philosophy is beyond doubt. To analyse Machism and at
the same time to ignore this connection—as Plekhanov does^([5])—is to
scoff at the spirit of dialectical materialism, _i.e.,_ to sacrifice the
method of Engels to the letter of Engels. Engels says explicitly that
“with each epoch making discovery even in the sphere of natural science
[“not to speak of the history of mankind”], materialism has to change
its form” _(Ludwig Feuerbach,_ Germ. ed., p. 19).^([6]) Hence, a
revision of the “form” of Engels’ materialism, a revision of his
natural-philosophical propositions is not only not “revisionism,” in the
accepted meaning of the term, but, on the contrary, is demanded by
Marxism. We criticise the Machians not for making such a revision, but
for their _purely revisionist_ trick of betraying the _essence_ of
materialism under the guise of criticising its _form_ and of adopting
the fundamental precepts of reactionary   bourgeois philosophy without
making the slightest attempt to deal directly, frankly and definitely
with assertions of Engels’ which are unquestionably extremely important
to the given question, as, for example, his assertion that “. . . motion
without matter is unthinkable” _(Anti-Dühring,_ p. 50).[7]

It goes without saying that in examining the connection between one of
the schools of modern physicists and the rebirth of philosophical
idealism, it is far from being our intention to deal with specific
physical theories. What interests us exclusively is the epistemological
conclusions that follow from certain definite propositions and generally
known discoveries. These epistemological conclusions are of themselves
so insistent that many physicists are already reaching for them. What is
more, there are already various trends among the physicists, and
definite schools are beginning to be formed on this basis. Our object,
therefore, will be confined to explaining clearly the essence of the
difference between these various trends and the relation in which they
stand to the fundamental lines of philosophy.

1. The Crisis in Modern Physics

In his book _Valeur de la science [Value of Science],_ the famous French
physicist Henri Poincaré says that there are “symptoms of a serious
crisis” in physics, and he devotes a special chapter to this crisis
(Chap. VIII, _cf_. p. 171). The crisis is not confined to the fact that
“radium, the great revolutionary,” is undermining the principle of the
conservation of energy. “All the other principles are equally
endangered” (p. 180). For instance, Lavoisier’s principle, or the
principle of the conservation of mass, has been undermined by the
electron theory of matter. According to this theory atoms are composed
of very minute particles called electrons, which are charged with
positive or negative electricity and “are immersed in a medium which we
call the ether.” The experiments of physicists provide data for
calculating the velocity of the electrons and their mass (or the
relation of their mass to their electrical charge). The velocity proves
to be comparable   with the velocity of light (300,000 kilometres per
second), attaining, for instance, one-third of the latter. Under such
circumstances the twofold mass of the electron has to be taken into
account, corresponding to the necessity of over coming the inertia,
firstly, of the electron itself and, secondly, of the ether. The former
mass will be the real or mechanical mass of the electron, the latter the
“electrodynamic mass which represents the inertia of the ether.” And it
turns out that the former mass is equal to zero. The entire mass of the
electrons, or, at least, of the negative electrons, proves to be totally
and exclusively electrodynamic in its origin.[8] Mass disappears. The
foundations of mechanics are undermined. Newton’s principle, the
equality of action and reaction, is undermined, and so on.

We are faced, says Poincaré, with the “ruins” of the old principles of
physics, “a general debacle of principles.” It is true, he remarks, that
all the mentioned departures from principles refer to infinitesimal
magnitudes; it is possible that we are still ignorant of other
infinitesimals counteracting the undermining of the old principles.
Moreover, radium is very rare. But at any rate we have reached a
“_period of doubt_.” We have already seen what epistemological
deductions the author draws from this “period of doubt": “it is not
nature which imposes on [or dictates to] us the concepts of space and
time, but we who impose them on nature"; “whatever is not thought, is
pure nothing.” These deductions are idealist deductions. The breakdown
of the most fundamental principles shows (such is Poincaré’s trend of
thought) that these principles are not copies, photographs of nature,
not images of something external in relation to man’s consciousness, but
products of his consciousness. Poincaré does not develop these
deductions consistently, nor is he essentially interested in the
philosophical aspect of the question. It is dealt with in detail by the
French writer on philosophical problems, Abel Rey, in his book _The
Physical Theory of the Modern Physicists (La Théorie physique chez les
physiciens contemporains,_ Paris, F. Alcan, 1907). True, the author
himself is a positivist, _i.e.,_ a muddlehead and a semi-Machian, but in
this case this is even a certain advantage, for he can not be suspected
of a desire to “slander” our Machians’ idol. Rey cannot be   trusted
when it comes to giving an exact philosophical definition of concepts
and of materialism in particular, for Rey too is a professor, and as
such is imbued with an utter contempt for the materialists (and
distinguishes himself by utter ignorance of the epistemology of
materialism). It goes without saying that a Marx or an Engels is
absolutely non-existent for such “men of science.” But Rey summarises
carefully and in general conscientiously the extremely abundant
literature on the subject, not only French, but English and German as
well (Ostwald and Mach in particular), so that we shall have frequent
recourse to his work.

The attention of philosophers in general, says the author, and also of
those who, for one reason or another, wish to criticise science
generally, has now been particularly attracted towards physics. “In
discussing the limits and value of physical knowledge, it is in effect
the legitimacy of positive science, the possibility of knowing the
object, that is criticised” (pp. i-ii). From the “crisis in modern
physics” people hasten to draw sceptical conclusions (p. 14). Now, what
is this crisis? During the first two-thirds of the nineteenth century
the physicists agreed among themselves on everything essential. They
believed in a purely mechanical explanation of nature: they assumed that
physics is nothing but a more complicated mechanics, namely, a molecular
mechanics. They differed only as to the methods used in reducing physics
to mechanics and as to the details of the mechanism. . . . At present
the spectacle presented by the physico-chemical sciences seems
completely changed. Extreme disagreement has replaced general unanimity,
and no longer does it concern details, but leading and fundamental
ideas. While it would be an exaggeration to say that each scientist has
his own peculiar tendencies, it must nevertheless be noted that science,
and especially physics, has, like art, its numerous schools, the
conclusions of which often differ from, and sometimes are directly
opposed and hostile to each other. . . .

“From this one may judge the significance and scope of what has been
called the crisis in modern physics.

“Down to the middle of the nineteenth century, traditional physics had
assumed that it was sufficient merely to extend physics in order to
arrive at a metaphysics of matter. This   physics ascribed to its
theories an ontological value. And its theories were all mechanistic.
The traditional mechanism [Rey employs this word in the specific sense
of a system of ideas which reduces physics to mechanics] thus claimed,
over and above the results of experience, a _real_ knowledge of the
material universe. This was not a hypothetical account of experience; it
was a dogma. . .” (p. 16).

We must here interrupt the worthy “positivist.” It is clear that he is
describing the materialist philosophy of traditional physics but does
not want to call the devil (materialism) by name. Materialism to a
Humean must appear to be metaphysics, dogma, a transgression of the
bounds of experience, and so forth. Knowing nothing of materialism, the
Humean Rey has no conception whatever of dialectics, of the difference
between dialectical materialism and metaphysical materialism, in Engels’
meaning of the term. Hence, the relation between absolute and relative
truth, for example, is absolutely unclear to Rey.

“. . . The criticism of traditional mechanism made during the whole of
the second half of the nineteenth century weakened the premise of the
ontological reality of mechanism. On the basis of these criticisms a
philosophical conception of physics was founded which became almost
traditional in 7philosophy at the end of the nineteenth century. Science
was nothing but a symbolic formula, a method of notation _(repérage,_
the creation of signs, marks, symbols), and since the methods of
notation varied according to the schools, the conclusion was soon
reached that only that was denoted which had been previously designed
(_fa&ctail;onné_) by man for notation (or symbolisation). Science became
a work of art for dilettantes, a work of art for utilitarians: views
which could with legitimacy be generally interpreted as the negation of
the possibility of science. A science which is a pure artifice for
acting upon nature, a mere utilitarian technique, has no right to call
itself science, without perverting the meaning of words. To say that
science can be nothing but such an artificial means of action is to
disavow science in the proper meaning of the term.

“The collapse of traditional mechanism, or, more precisely, the
criticism to which it was subjected, led to the proposition that science
itself had also collapsed. From the   impossibility of adhering purely
and simply to traditional mechanism it was inferred that science was
impossible” (pp. 16-17).

And the author asks: “Is the present crisis in physics a temporary and
external incident in the evolution of science, or is science itself
making an abrupt right-about-face and definitely abandoning the path it
has hitherto pursued?. . .”

“If the [physical and chemical] sciences, which in history have been
essentially emancipators, collapse in this crisis, which reduces them to
the status of mere, technically useful recipes but deprives them of all
significance from the stand point of knowledge of nature, the result
must needs be a complete revolution both in the art of logic and the
history of ideas. Physics then loses all educational value; the spirit
of positive science it represents becomes false and dangerous.” Science
can offer only practical recipes but no real knowledge. “Knowledge of
the real must be sought and given by other means. . . . One must take
another road, one must return to subjective intuition, to a mystical
sense of reality, in a word, to the mysterious, all that of which one
thought it had been deprived” (p. 19).

As a positivist, the author considers such a view wrong and the crisis
in physics only temporary. We shall presently see how Rey purifies Mach,
Poincaré and Co. of these conclusions. At present we shall confine
ourselves to noting the fact of the “crisis” and its significance. From
the last words of Rey quoted by us it is quite clear what reactionary
elements have taken advantage of and aggravated this crisis. Rey
explicitly states in the preface to his work that “the fideist and
anti-intellectualist movement of the last years of the nineteenth
century” is seeking “to base itself on the general spirit of modern
physics” (p. ii). In France, those who put faith above reason are called
fideists (from the Latin _fides,_ faith). Anti-intellectualism is a
doctrine that denies the rights or claims of reason. Hence, in its
philosophical aspect, the essence of the “crisis in modern physics” is
that the old physics regarded its theories as “real knowledge of the
material world,” _i.e.,_ a reflection of objective reality. The new
trend in physics regards theories only as symbols, signs, and marks for
practice, _i.e.,_ it denies the existence of an objective reality
independent of our mind and   reflected by it. If Rey had used correct
philosophical terminology, he would have said: the materialist theory of
knowledge, instinctively accepted by the earlier physics, has been
replaced by an idealist and agnostic theory of knowledge, which, against
the wishes of the idealists and agnostics, has been taken advantage of
by fideism.

But Rey does not present this replacement, which constitutes the crisis,
as though all the modern physicists stand opposed to all the old
physicists. No. He shows that in their epistemological trends the modern
physicists are divided into three schools: the energeticist or
conceptualist school; the mechanistic or neo-mechanistic school, to
which the vast majority of physicists still adhere; and in between the
two, the critical school. To the first belong Mach and Duhem; to the
third, Henri Poincaré to the second, Kirchhoff, Helmholtz, Thomson (Lord
Kelvin), Maxwell—among the older physicists—and Larmor and Lorentz among
the modern physicists. What the essence of the _two_ basic trends is
(for the third is not independent, but intermediate) may be judged from
the following words of Rey’s:

“Traditional mechanism constructed a system of the material world.” Its
doctrine of the structure of matter was based on “elements qualitatively
homogenous and identical"; and elements were to be regarded as
“immutable, impenetrable,” etc. Physics “constructed a _real_ edifice
out of _real_ materials and _real_ cement. The physicist possessed
_material elements,_ _the causes and modes_ of their action, and the
_real_ laws of their action” (pp. 33-38). “The change in this view
consists in the rejection of the ontological significance of the
theories and in an exaggerated emphasis on the phenomenological
significance of physics.” The conceptualist view operates with “pure
abstractions . . . and seeks a purely abstract theory which will as far
as possible eliminate the hypothesis of matter. . . . The notion of
energy thus becomes the substructure of the new physics. This is why
conceptualist physics may most often be called _energeticist_ physics,”
although this designation does not fit, for example, such a
representative of conceptualist physics as Mach (p. 46).

Rey’s identification of energetics with Machism is not altogether
correct, of course; nor is his assurance that the   neo-mechanistic
school as well is approaching a phenomenalist view of physics (p. 48),
despite the profundity of its disagreement with the conceptualists.
Rey’s “new” terminology does not clarify, but rather obscures matters;
but we could not avoid it if we were to give the reader an idea of how a
“positivist” regards the crisis in physics. Essentially, the opposition
of the “new” school to the old views fully coincides, as the reader may
have convinced himself, with Kleinpeter’s criticism of Helmholtz quoted
above. In his presentation of the views of the various physicists Rey
reflects the indefiniteness and vacillation of their philosophical
views. The _essence_ of the crisis in modern physics consists in the
breakdown of the old laws and basic principles, in the rejection of an
objective reality existing outside the mind, that is, in the replacement
of materialism by idealism and agnosticism. “Matter has disappeared"—one
may thus express the fundamental and characteristic difficulty in
relation to many of the particular questions, which has created this
crisis. Let us pause to discuss this difficulty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] _X-rays, Becquerel rays,_radium—discoveries which, laid the basis
for the development of atomic physics.

X-rays (Rontgen rays) are extremely short-wave electromagnetic radiation
’which can pass through media impenetrable by visible   light. They were
discovered by the German physicist Wilhelm Konrad R6ntgen in December
1895 who described their main properties; later the nature of this
radiation was discovered.

In 1896 the French physicist Antoine-Henri Becquerel, while studying the
action of various fluorescent substances on photo graphic film,
discovered that uranium salts affect such film in the dark even without
previous exposure to light. By further experiments he showed that this
action was due to a new form of radiation distinct from X-rays.

Investigating this new form of radiation, Pierre and Marie Curie
established that it was due to a hitherto unknown property of matter,
which they called radioactivity. As a result of their experiments two
new radioactive elements were discovered: polonium and radium (1898).
Later it was found that Becquerel’s rays consist of three components
(alpha-, beta- and gamma-rays).

[2] This discovery was made by lames Clerk Maxwell. By generalising
Michael Faraday’s experimental results in the study of electromagnetic
phenomena he created the theory of the electromagnetic field, from which
it followed that changes of the electromagnetic field are propagated
with the speed of light. On the basis of his researches, Maxwell in 1805
concluded that light consists of electromagnetic vibrations. In 1886-89
his theory was confirmed experimentally by Heinrich Hertz, who proved
the existence of electromagnetic waves.

[3] The study of radioactivity revealed the existence of a special kind
of radiation: alpha-, beta- and gamma-rays. In 1903, Ernest Rutherford
and Frederick Soddy suggested that radioactivity was the spontaneous
transformation of one chemical element into another. This was speedily
confirmed by William Ramsay and Frederick Soddy, who discovered that
helium was one of the products of radioactive disintegration of radon
(1903). Shortly afterwards it was discovered that helium was formed by
the disintegration of radium and other radioactiye elements showing
alpha-radioactivity. This formation of helium was an important argument
in favour of the theory of radioactive transformations, and could only
be explained by supposing that alpha-rays are the nuclei of helium
atoms. This was confirmed in 1909 by the experiments of T. Rutherford
and T. Royds.

[4] Lenin uses the concept of the ether, which was still generally
accepted in physics at the beginning of the twentieth century. The idea
of the ether as a special material medium filling all space and acting
as the carrier of light, gravitational forces, etc., was put forward in
the seventeenth century. Later, the notion of different forms of the
ether, independent of one another (electromagnetic, magnetic, etc.) was
introduced to explain various phenomena. Owing to the success of the
wave theory of light, the concept of the luminiferous ether (Christian
Huygens, Austin Frosnel and others) was especially developed;
subsequently the hypothesis of a   single ether arose. As science
developed, however, the concept of the ether came into contradiction
with new facts. The untenability of the hypothesis of the ether as a
universal mechanical medium was proved by the theory of relativity; the
rational elements contained in the hypothesis of the ether were
reflected in the quantum field theory (tile vacuum concept).

[5] Lenin repeatedly pointed out the limited nature of Plekhanov’s
criticism of Machism. In 1905, in connection with his preface to the
second Russian edition of Engels’ _Ludwig Feuerbaeh and the End of
Classical German Philosophy,_ Lenin wrote: “How petty are his sallies
and ’pinpricks against the Machists! For me this is the more to be
regretted since Plekhanov’s criticism of Mach seems to me essentially
correct" _(Lenin Miscellany XXVI,_ p. 21). In 1907-08, in the works
_Fundamental Problems of Marxism, Materialismus militais_ and others,
Plekhnnov criticised Machism and its adherents in Russia (Bogdanov,
Lunacharsky and others) and pointed out the fallacy of their attempts to
combine Marxism with the subjective-idealist philosophy of Mach and
Avenarius. In so doing, Plekhanov “was less concerned with refuting Mach
than with dealing a factional blow at Bolshevism” (see p. 355 of this
volume).

Plekhanov’s opposition to Machism played a positive part in defending
Marxist philosophy from the attacks of the revisionists, but he did not
give a deep theoretical analysis of empirio-criticism, and did not
reveal the direct dependence of Machism on the crisis in natural
science, confining himself to a criticism of the idealist
epistemological views of some of its adherents.

[6] See K. Marx and F. Engels, _Selected Works,_ Vol. II, Moscow, 1958,
p. 375. 94.

[7] See F. Engels, _Anti-Duhring,_ Moscow, 1959, p. 86.

[8] The description of the concept of mass given by Henri Poincaré and
quoted by Lenin was in accord with the level of development of physics
at that time. The development of the electronic theory that followed the
discovery of the electron made it possible to explain the nature of the
mass of the electron. Joseph John Thom son advanced the hypothesis that
the actual mass of the electron is determined by the energy of the
electromagnetic field (i.e., the inertia of the electron is due to the
inertia of the field). The concept of the electromagnetic mass of the
electron was introduced, and this mass was found to depend on the
velocity of motion of the electron. The mechanical mass of the electron,
however, like that of any other particle, was regarded as unchanging.
The existence of the mechanical mass should have been revealed by
experiments on the dependence of the electromagnetic mass of the
electron on its velocity. However, these experiments, performed by
Walter Kaufmann in 1901-02, unexpectedly showed that the electron
behaved as if all its mass was of an electromagnetic nature. Hence the
conclusion was drawn that, in the case of the electron,   mechanical
mass, which was formerly regarded as an inalienable property of matter,
has disappeared. This circumstance gave rise to various kinds of
philosophical speculations and statements about the "disappearance of
matter’, the fallacy of which was demonstrated by Lenin. The further
development of physics (relativity theory) showed that mechanical mass
also depends on velocity of motion and that the mass of the electron
cannot be reduced wholly to electromagnetic mass.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 2. 'MATTER HAS DISAPPEARED'


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Five: The Recent Revolution in Natural Science and Philosophical Idealism )

2. “Matter Has Disappeared”

Such, literally, is the expression that may be encountered in the
descriptions given by modern physicists of recent discoveries. For
instance, L. Houllevigue, in his book _The Evolution of the Sciences,_
entitles his chapter on the new theories of matter: “Does Matter Exist?”
He says: “The atom dematerialises, matter disappears.”^([1]) To see how
easily fundamental philosophical conclusions are drawn from this by the
Machians, let us take Valentinov. He writes: “The statement that the
scientific explanation of the world can find a firm foundation only in
materialism is nothing but a fiction, and what is more, an absurd
fiction” (p. 67). He quotes as a destroyer of this absurd fiction
Augusto Righi, the well-known Italian physicist, who says that the
electron theory “is not so much a theory of electricity   as of matter;
the new system simply puts electricity in the place of matter.” (Augusto
Righi, _Die moderne Theorie der physikalischen Erscheinungen_, [_The
Modern Theory of Physical Phenomena_], Leipzig, 1905, S. 131. There is a
Russian translation.) Having quoted these words (p. 64), Mr. Valentinov
exclaims:

“Why does Righi permit himself to commit this offence against sacred
matter? Is it perhaps because he is a solipsist, an idealist, a
bourgeois criticist, an empirio-monist, or even someone worse?”

This remark, which seems to Mr. Valentinov to annihilate the
materialists by its sarcasm, only discloses his virgin innocence on the
subject of philosophical materialism. Mr. Valentinov has no suspicion of
the _real_ connection between philosophical idealism and the
“disappearance of matter.” The “disappearance of matter” _of which he
speaks,_ in imitation of the modern physicists, has no relation to the
epistemological distinction between materialism and idealism. To make
this clear, let us take one of the most consistent and clearest of the
Machians, Karl Pearson. For him the physical universe consists of groups
of sense-impressions. He illustrates “our conceptual model of the
physical universe” by the following diagram, explaining, however, that
it takes no account of relative sizes _(The Grammar of Science,_ p.
282):–

[Karl Pearson's conceptual model of the physical universe.]

In order to simplify his diagram, Karl Pearson entirely omits the
question of the relation between ether and electricity, or positive
electrons and negative electrons. But that is not important. What is
important is that from Pearson’s idealist standpoint “bodies” are first
regarded as sense-impressions, and then the constitution of these bodies
out of   particles, particles out of molecules and so forth affects the
changes in the model of the physical world, but in no way affects the
question of whether bodies are symbols of perceptions, or perceptions
images of bodies. Materialism and idealism differ in their respective
answers to the question of the _source_ of our knowledge and of the
relation of knowledge (and of the “mental” in general) to the _physical_
world; while the question of the structure of matter, of atoms and
electrons, is a question that concerns only this “physical world.” When
the physicists say that “matter is disappearing,” they mean that
hitherto science reduced its investigations of the physical world to
three ultimate concepts: matter, electricity and ether; whereas now
_only_ the two latter remain. For it has become possible to reduce
matter to electricity; the atom can be explained as resembling an
infinitely small solar system, within which negative electrons[3] move
around a positive electron^([4]) with a definite (and, as we have seen,
enormously large) velocity. It is consequently possible to reduce the
physical world from scores of elements to two or three elements
(inasmuch as positive and negative electrons constitute “two essentially
distinct kinds of matter,” as the physicist Pellat says—Rey, _op_.
_cit_., pp. 294-95). Hence, natural science leads to the “_unity of
matter_” (_ibid_.)^([2]) —such is the real meaning of the statement
regarding the disappearance of matter, its replacement by electricity,
etc., which is leading so many people astray. “Matter is disappearing”
means that the limit within which we have hitherto known matter is
vanishing and that our knowledge is penetrating deeper; properties of
matter are likewise disappearing which formerly seemed absolute,
immutable, and primary (impenetrability, inertia, mass,^([5]) etc.) and
which are now revealed to be relative and characteristic only of certain
states of matter. For the _sole_ “property” of matter with whose
recognition philosophical   materialism is bound up is the property of
_being an objective reality,_ of existing outside our mind.

The error of Machism in general, as of the Machian new physics, is that
it ignores this basis of philosophical materialism and the distinction
between metaphysical materialism and dialectical materialism. The
recognition of immutable elements, “of the immutable substance of
things,” and so forth, is not materialism, but _metaphysical,_ _i.e.,_
anti-dialectical, materialism. That is why J. Dietzgen emphasised that
the “subject-matter of science is endless,” that not only the in finite,
but the “smallest atom” is immeasurable, unknowable to the end,
_inexhaustible,_ “for nature in all her parts has no beginning and no
end” _(Kleinere philosophische Schriften,_ S. 229-30). That is why
Engels gave the example of the discovery of alizarin in coal tar and
criticised _mechanical_ materialism. In order to present the question in
the only correct way, that is, from the dialectical materialist
standpoint, we must ask: Do electrons, ether _and so on_ exist as
objective realities outside the human mind or not? The scientists will
also have to answer this question unhesitatingly; and they do invariably
answer it in the _affirmative,_ just as they unhesitatingly recognise
that nature existed prior to man and prior to organic matter. Thus, the
question is decided in favour of materialism, for the concept matter, as
we already stated, epistemologically implies _nothing but_ objective
reality existing independently of the human mind and renected by it.

But dialectical materialism insists on the approximate, relative
character of every scientific theory of the structure of matter and its
properties; it insists on the absence of absolute boundaries in nature,
on the transformation of moving matter from one state into another,
which is to us apparently irreconcilable with it, and so forth. However
bizarre from the standpoint of “common sense” the transformation of
imponderable ether into ponderable matter and _vice versa_ may appear,
however “strange” may seem the absence of any other kind of mass in the
electron save electromagnetic mass, however extraordinary may be the
fact that the mechanical laws of motion are confined only to a single
sphere of natural phenomena and are subordinated to the more profound
laws of electromagnetic phenomena, and so forth—all   this is but
another _corroboration_ of dialectical materialism. It is mainly because
the physicists did not know dialectics that the new physics strayed into
idealism. They combated metaphysical (in Engels’, and not the
positivist, _i.e.,_ Humean, sense of the word) materialism and its
one-sided “mechanism,” and in so doing threw the baby out with the
bath-water. Denying the immutability of the elements and the properties
of matter known hitherto, they ended in denying matter, _i.e.,_ the
objective reality of the physical world. Denying the absolute character
of some of the most important and basic laws, they ended in denying all
objective law in nature and in declaring that a law of nature is a mere
convention, “a limitation of expectation,” “a logical necessity,” and so
forth. Insisting on the approximate and relative character of our
knowledge, they ended in denying the object independent of the mind and
reflected approximately-correctly and relatively-truthfully by the mind.
And so on, and so forth, without end.

The opinions expressed by Bogdanov in 1899 regarding “the immutable
essence of things,” the opinions of Valentinov and Yushkevich regarding
“substance,” and so forth—are similar fruits of ignorance of dialectics.
From Engels’ point of view, the only immutability is the reflection by
the human mind (when there is a human mind) of an external world
existing and developing independently of the mind. No other
“immutability,” no other “essence,” no other “absolute substance,” in
the sense in which these concepts were depicted by the empty
professorial philosophy, exist for Marx and Engels. The “essence” of
things, or “substance,” is _also_ relative; it expresses only the degree
of profundity of man’s knowledge of objects; and while yesterday the
profundity of this knowledge did not go beyond the atom, and today does
not go beyond the electron and ether, dialectical materialism insists on
the temporary, relative, approximate character of all these _milestones_
in the knowledge of nature gained by the progressing science of man. The
electron is as _inexhaustible_ as the atom, nature is infinite, but it
infinitely _exists_. And it is this sole categorical, this sole
unconditional recognition of nature’s _existence_ outside the mind and
perception of man that distinguishes dialectical materialism from
relativist agnosticism and idealism.

Let us cite two examples of the way in which the new physics wavers
unconsciously and instinctively between dialectical materialism, which
remains unknown to the bourgeois scientists, and “phenomenalism,” with
its inevitable subjectivist (and, subsequently, directly fideist)
deductions.

This same Augusto Righi, from whom Mr. Valentinov was _unable_ to get a
reply on the question which interested him about materialism, writes in
the introduction to his book: “What the electrons, or electrical atoms,
really are remains even now a mystery; but in spite of this, the new
theory is perhaps destined in time to achieve no small philosophical
significance, since it is arriving at entirely new hypotheses regarding
the structure of ponderable matter and is striving to reduce all
phenomena of the external world to one common origin.

“For the positivist and utilitarian tendencies of our time such an
advantage may be of small consequence, and a theory is perhaps regarded
primarily as a means of conveniently ordering and summarising facts and
as a guide in the search for further phenomena. But while in former
times perhaps too much confidence was placed in the faculties of the
human mind, and it was considered too easy to grasp the ultimate causes
of all things, there is nowadays a tendency to fall into the opposite
error” (op. cit., p. 3).

Why does Righi dissociate himself here from the positivist and
utilitatian tendencies? Because, while apparently he has no definite
philosophical standpoint, he instinctively clings to the reality of the
external world and to the recognition that the new theory is not only a
“convenience” (Poincaré), not only an “empirio-symbol” (Yushkevich), not
only a “harmonising of experience” (Bogdanov), or whatever else they
call such subjectivist fancies, but a further step in the cognition of
objective reality. Had this physicist been acquainted with _dialectical_
materialism, his opinion of the error which is the opposite of the old
metaphysical materialism might perhaps have become the starting point of
a correct philosophy. But these people’s whole environment estranges
them from Marx and Engels and throws them into the embrace of vulgar
official philosophy.

Rey too is entirely unfamiliar with dialectics. But he too is compelled
to state that among the modern physicists   there are those who continue
the traditions of “mechanism” _(i.e., materialism)._ The path of
“mechanism,” says he, is pursued not only by Kirchhoff, Hertz,
Boltzmann, Maxwell, Helmholtz and Lord Kelvin. “Pure mechanists, and in
some respects more mechanist than anybody else, and representing the
culmination _(l’aboutissant)_ of mechanism, are those who follow Lorentz
and Larmor in formulating an electrical theory of matter and who arrive
at a denial of the constancy of mass, declaring it to be a function of
motion. _They are all mechanists because they take real motion as their
starting point_” (Rey’s italics, pp. 290-91).

“. . . If, for example, the recent hypotheses of Lorentz, Larmor and
Langevin were, thanks to certain experimental confirmation, to obtain a
sufficiently stable basis for the systematisation of physics, it would
be certain that the laws of present-day mechanics are nothing but a
corollary of the laws of electromagnetism: they would constitute a
special case of the latter within well-defined limits. Constancy of mass
and our principle of inertia would be valid only for moderate velocities
of bodies, the term ‘moderate’ being taken in relation to our senses and
to the phenomena which constitute our general experience. A general
recasting of mechanics would result, and hence also, a general recasting
of the systematisation of physics.”

“Would this imply the abandonment of mechanism? By no means. The purely
mechanist tradition would still be followed, and mechanism would follow
its normal course of development” (p. 295).

“Electronic physics, which should be ranked among the theories of a
generally mechanist spirit, tends at present to impose its
systematisation on physics. Although the fundamental principles of this
electronic physics are not furnished by mechanics but by the
experimental data of the theory of electricity, its spirit is
mechanistic, because: (1) It uses _figurative (figurés),_ _material_
elements to represent physical properties and their laws; it expresses
itself in terms of perception. (2) While it no longer regards physical
phenomena as particular cases of mechanical phenomena, it regards
mechanical phenomena as particular cases of physical phenomena. The laws
of mechanics thus retain their _direct continuity_ with the laws of
physics; and the concepts of   mechanics remain concepts of the same
order as physico-chemical concepts. In traditional mechanism it was
motions copied _(calqués)_ from _relatively slow_ motions, which, since
they alone were known and most directly observable, were taken. . . as a
type of all possible motions. _Recent experiments,_ on the contrary,
show that it is necessary to _extend_ our conception of possible
motions. Traditional mechanics remains entirely intact, but it now
applies only to relatively slow motions. . . . In relation to large
velocities, the laws of motion are different. Matter appears to be
reduced to electrical particles, the ultimate elements of the atom. . .
. (3) Motion, displacement in space, remains the only figurative
_(figuré)_ element of physical theory. (4) Finally, what from the
standpoint of the general spirit of physics comes before every other
consideration is the fact that the conception of physics, its methods,
its theories, and their relation to experience remains _absolutely
identical_ with the conception of mechanism, with the conception of
physics held since the Renaissance” (pp. 46-47).

I have given this long quotation from Rey in full because owing to his
perpetual anxiety to avoid “materialist metaphysics,” it would have been
impossible to expound his statements in any other way. But however much
both Rey and the physicists of whom he speaks abjure materialism, it is
nevertheless beyond question that mechanics was a copy of real motions
of moderate velocity, while the new physics is a copy of real motions of
enormous velocity. The recognition of theory as a copy, as an
approximate copy of objective reality, is materialism. When Rey says
that among modern physicists there “is a reaction against the
conceptualist [Machian] and energeticist school,” and when he ranks the
physicists of the electron theory among the representatives of this
reaction (p. 46), we could desire no better corroboration of the fact
that the struggle is essentially between the materialist and the
idealist tendencies. But we must not forget that, apart from the general
prejudices against materialism common to all educated philistines, the
most outstanding theoreticians are handicapped by a complete ignorance
of dialectics.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] L. Houllevigue, _L’évolution des sciences_ [_The Evolution of the
Sciences],_ Paris (A. Collin), 1908, pp. 63, 87, 88; _cf_. his article:
“_Les idées des pbysiciens sur la matière_”, [_The Physicists’ Ideas of
Matter]_, in _L’année psycbologique_,^([6]) 1908. —_Lenin_

[2] _Cf_. Oliver Lodge, _Sur les électrons,_ Paris, 1906, p. 159. “The
electrical theory of matter,” the recognition of electricity as the
“fundamental substance,” is “an approximate accomplishment of that to
what the philosophers strove always, that is, the unity of matter";
_cf_. also Augusto Righi, _Ueber die Struktur der Materie_ [_On the
Structure of Matter_], Leipzig, 1908; J. J. Thomson, _The Corpuscular
Theory of Matter,_ London, 1907; P. Langevin, “_La physique des
électrons_” [_The Physics of the Electrons_], _Revue générale des
sciences_,^([7]) 1905, pp. 257-76. —_Lenin_

[6] _L’anée psychologique (The Psychological Year)_—the organ of a group
of French bourgeois idealist psychologists, published in Paris from
1894. It ’was first edited by Alfred Binet, and afterwards by H. Piéron

[3] The idea of the compound nature of the atom arose at the end of the
nineteenth century as a result of the discovery of the periodic system
of elements by Mendeleyev, the electromagnetic nature of light, the
electron, and the phenomena of radioactivity. Various models of the atom
were proposed. Lenin regarded as most probable the planetary model, the
idea of which ’was advanced as a guess at the end of the nineteenth
century. It was experimentally confirmed by Ernest Rutherford, who
investigated the penetration of various substances by alpha-particles
(positively charged helium nuclei) and came to the conclusion that the
positive charge is concentrated at the centre of the atom, occupying a
very small part of the latter’s volume. In 1911 he suggested a model of
the atom having a positively charged nucleus at the centre, with a mass
almost equal to the whole mass of the atom, around which electrons
revolve in various orbits, like planets round the sun. This model,
however, could not explain the stability of the atom. The first
successful attempt to create a theory of atomic structure was based on
Rutherford’s model and made use of the quantum postulates of Niels Bohr
(1913). According to this first quantum theory of the atom, an electron
moves in one of the “stable” orbits (corresponding to definite discrete
energy values) without radiation; radiation or absorption of a definite
portion of energy by the atom occurs only on the passage of the electron
from one orbit to another.

Further advances in physics enriched the representation of the structure
of the atom. An important part was played here by Louis de Broglie’s
prediction of wave properties of micro-objects and the subsequent
creation of quantum mechanics by Erwin Schrödinger, Werner Heisenberg
and others. According to modern ideas the atomic nucleus is surrounded
by a cloud of electrons, which occupy various orbits corresponding to
definite energy values, and which form with the nucleus a single
interconnected system.

The development of physics has shown that the atomic nucleus consists of
elementary particles—nucleons (protons and neutrons). New properties of
the electron—besides its mass and charge, which were already known in
the early twentieth century—have been discovered, including the
possibility of its conversion into other particles. In addition to the
electron, a number of new elementary   particles with diverse properties
have been discovered (photons, protons, neutrons, neutrinos, various
kinds of mesons and hype Ions). Particles have also been, discovered
which possess characteristics equal in magnitude to those of other
particles but of opposite sign (so-called anti-particles).

The development of knowledge of the structure of matter has led to man’s
mastery over nuclear processes and the utilisation of nuclear energy,
initiating a new technical revolution of tremendous significance for the
future of mankind.

[4] Positive electron— the name given at the turn of the century to the
elementary particle bearing a charge of positive electricity. The
existence of the positive electron (positron) in the modern sense was
predicted in 1928 by the British physicist Paul Dirac; in 1932 the
American physicist Carl Anderson discovered the positron in cosmic rays.

[7] Revue géntrale des sciences purer et appliquées (General Review of
Pure and Applied Science) —a journal of natural science published in
Paris from 1890. It was founded by Laurence Olivier.

[5] This refers apparently to mechanical mass, which classical p3iysics
regarded as an eternal and unchanging property of matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 3. IS MOTION WITHOUT MATTER CONCEIVABLE?


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Five: The Recent Revolution in Natural Science and Philosophical Idealism )

3. Is Motion Without Matter Conceivable?

The fact that philosophical idealism is attempting to make use of the
new physics, or that idealist conclusions are being drawn from the
latter, is due not to the discovery of new kinds of substance and force,
of matter and motion, but to the fact that an attempt is being made to
conceive motion without matter. And it is the essence of this attempt
which our Machians fail to examine. They were unwilling to take account
of Engels’ statement that “motion without matter is unthinkable.” J.
Dietzgen in 1869, in his _The Nature of tbe Workings of the Human Mind,_
expressed the same idea as Engels, although, it is true, not without his
usual muddled attempts to “reconcile” materialism and idealism. Let us
leave aside these attempts, which are to a large extent to be explained
by the fact that Dietzgen is arguing against Büchner’s non-dialectical
materialism, and let us examine Dietzgen’s own statements on the
question under consideration. He says: “They [the idealists] want to
have the general without the particular, mind without matter, force
without substance, science without experience or material, the absolute
without the relative” _(Das Wesen der menschlichen Kopfarbeit,_ 1903, S.
108). Thus the endeavour to divorce motion from matter, force from
substance, Dietzgen associates with idealism, compares with the
endeavour to divorce thought from the brain. “Liebig,” Dietzgen
continues, “who is especially fond of straying from his inductive
science into the field of speculation, says in the spirit of idealism:
‘force cannot be seen’” (p. 109). “The spiritualist or the idealist
believes in the spiritual, _i.e.,_ ghostlike and inexplicable, nature of
force” (p. 110). “The antithesis between force and matter is as old as
the antithesis between idealism and materialism” (p. 111). “Of course,
there is no force without matter, no matter without force; forceless
matter and matterless force are absurdities. If there are idealist
natural scientists who believe in the immaterial existence of forces, on
this point they are not natural scientists. . . but seers of ghosts”
(p. 114).

We thus see that scientists who were prepared to grant that motion is
conceivable without matter were to be encountered forty years ago too,
and that “on this point” Dietzgen declared them to be seers of ghosts.
What, then, is   the connection between philosophical idealism and the
divorce of matter from motion, the separation of substance from force?
Is it not “more economical,” indeed, to conceive motion without matter?

Let us imagine a consistent idealist who holds that the entire world is
his sensation, his idea, etc. (if we take “nobody’s” sensation or idea,
this changes only the variety of philosophical idealism but not its
essence). The idealist would not even think of denying that the world is
motion, _i.e.,_ the motion of his thoughts, ideas, sensations. The
question as to _what_ moves, the idealist will reject and regard as
absurd: what is taking place is a change of his sensations, his ideas
come and go, and nothing more. Outside him there is nothing. “It
moves"—and that is all. It is impossible to conceive a more “economical”
way of thinking. And no proofs, syllogisms, or definitions are capable
of refuting the solipsist if he consistently adheres to his view.

The fundamental distinction between the materialist and the adherent of
idealist philosophy consists in the fact that the materialist regards
sensation, perception, idea, and the mind of man generally, as an image
of objective reality. The world is the movement of this objective
reality reflected by our consciousness. To the movement of ideas,
perceptions, etc., there corresponds the movement of matter outside me.
The concept matter expresses nothing more than the objective reality
which is given us in sensation. Therefore, to divorce motion from matter
is equivalent to divorcing thought from objective reality, or to
divorcing my sensations from the external world—in a word, it is to go
over to idealism. The trick which is usually performed in denying
matter, and in assuming motion without matter, consists in ignoring the
relation of matter to thought. The question is presented as though this
relation did not exist, but in reality it is introduced surreptitiously;
at the beginning of the argument it remains unexpressed, but
subsequently crops up more or less imperceptibly.

Matter has disappeared, they tell us, wishing from this to draw
epistemological conclusions. But has thought remained?—we ask. If not,
if with the disappearance of matter thought has also disappeared, if
with the disappearance   of the brain and nervous system ideas and
sensations, too, have disappeared—then it follows that everything has
disappeared. And your argument has disappeared as a sample of “thought”
(or lack of thought)! But if it has remained—if it is assumed that with
the disappearance of matter, thought (idea, sensation, etc.) does not
disappear, then you have surreptitiously gone over to the standpoint of
philosophical idealism. And this always happens with people who wish,
for “economy’s sake,” to conceive of motion without matter, for
_tacitly,_ by the very fact that they continue to argue, they are
acknowledging the existence of thought _after_ the disappearance of
matter. This means that a very simple, or a very complex philosophical
idealism is taken as a basis; a very simple one, if it is a case of
frank solipsism _(I_ exist, and the world is only _my_ sensation); a
very complex one, if instead of the thought, ideas and sensations of a
living person, a dead abstraction is posited, that is, nobody’s thought,
nobody’s idea, nobody’s sensation, but thought in general (the Absolute
Idea, the Universal Will, etc.), sensation as an indeterminate
“element,” the “psychical,” which is substituted for the whole of
physical nature, etc., etc. Thousands of shades of varieties of
philosophical idealism are possible and it is always possible to create
a thousand and first shade; and to the author of this thousand and first
little system (empirio-monism, for example) what distinguishes it from
the rest may appear to be momentous. From the standpoint of materialism,
however, the distinction is absolutely unessential. What is essential is
the point of departure. What is essential is that the attempt to _think_
of motion without matter smuggles in _thought_ divorced from matter—and
that is philosophical idealism.

Therefore, for example, the English Machian Karl Pearson, the clearest
and most consistent of the Machians, who is averse to verbal trickery,
directly begins the seventh chapter of his book, devoted to “matter,”
with the characteristic heading “All things move—but only in
conception.” “It is therefore, for the sphere of perception, idle to ask
what moves and why it moves” _(The Grammar of Science,_ p. 243).

Therefore, too, in the case of Bogdanov, his philosophical misadventures
in fact began before his acquaintance with   Mach. They began from the
moment he put his trust in the assertion of the eminent chemist, but
poor philosopher, Ostwald, that motion can be thought of without matter.
It is all the more fitting to pause on this long-past episode in
Bogdanov’s philosophical development since it is impossible when
speaking of the connection between philosophical idealism and certain
trends in the new physics to ignore Ostwald’s “energetics.”

“We have already said,” wrote Bogdanov in 1899, “that the nineteenth
century did not succeed in ultimately ridding itself of the problem of
‘the immutable essence of things.’ This essence, under the name of
‘matter,’ even holds an important place in the world outlook of the
foremost thinkers of the century” _(Fundamental Elements of the
Historical Outlook on Nature,_ p. 38).

We said that this is a sheer muddle. The recognition of the objective
reality of the outer world, the recognition of the existence outside our
mind of eternally moving and eternally changing matter, is here confused
with the recognition of the immutable essence of things. It is hardly
possible that Bogdanov in 1899 did not rank Marx and Engels among the
“foremost thinkers.” But he obviously did not understand dialectical
materialism.

“. . . In the processes of nature two aspects are usually still
distinguished: matter and-its motion. It cannot be said that the concept
matter is distinguished by great clarity. It is not easy to give a
satisfactory answer to the question—what is matter? It is defined as the
‘cause of sensations’ or as the ‘permanent possibility of sensation’;
but it is evident that matter is here confused with motion. . . .”

It is evident that Bogdanov is arguing incorrectly. Not only does he
confuse the materialist recognition of an objective source of sensations
(unclearly formulated in the words “cause of sensations") with Mill’s
agnostic definition of matter as the permanent _possibility_ of
sensation, but the chief error here is that the author, having boldly
approached the question of the existence or non-existence of an
objective source of sensations, abandons this question half-way and
jumps to another question, the question of the existence or
non-existence of matter without motion. The idealist may regard the
world as the _movement_ of our sensations (even   though “socially
organised” and “harmonised” to the highest degree); the materialist
regards the world as the movement of an objective source, of an
objective model of our sensations. The metaphysical, _i.e.,_
anti-dialectical, materialist may accept the existence of matter without
motion (even though temporarily, before “the first impulse,” etc.). The
dialectical materialist not only regards motion as an inseparable
property of matter, but rejects the simplified view of motion and so
forth.

“. . . The most exact definition would, perhaps, be the following:
‘matter is what moves’; but this is as devoid of content as though one
were to say that matter is the subject of a sentence, the predicate of
which is ‘moves.’ The fact, most likely, is that in the epoch of statics
men were wont to see something necessarily solid in the role of the
subject, an ‘object,’ and such an inconvenient thing for statical
thought as ‘motion’ they were prepared to tolerate only as a predicate,
as one of the attributes of ‘matter.’”

This is something like the charge Akimov brought against the
_Iskra_-ists, namely, that their programme did not contain the word
proletariat in the nominative case!^([2]) Whether we say the world is
moving matter, or that the world is material motion, makes no difference
whatever.

“ . . . But energy must have a vehicle—say those who believe in matter.
Why?—asks Ostwald, and with reason. Must nature necessarily consist of
subject and predicate?” (p. 39)

Ostwald’s answer, which so pleased Bogdanov in 1899, is plain sophistry.
Must our judgments necessarily consist of electrons and ether?—one might
retort to Ostwald. As a matter of fact, the mental elimination from
“nature” of matter as the “subject” only implies the tacit admission
into _philosophy of thought_ as the “subject” _(i.e.,_ as the primary,
the starting point, independent of matter). Not the subject, but the
objective source of sensation is eliminated, and _sensation_ becomes the
“subject,” _i.e.,_ philosophy becomes Berke leian, no matter in what
trappings the word “sensation” is afterwards decked. Ostwald endeavoured
to avoid this inevitable philosophical alternative (materialism or
idealism) by an indefinite use of the word “energy,” but this very
endeavour only once again goes to prove the futility of such artifices.
If energy is motion, you have only shifted   the difficulty from the
subject to the predicate, you have only changed the question, does
matter move? into the question, is energy material? Does the
transformation of energy take place outside my mind, independently of
man and mankind, or are these only ideas, symbols, conventional signs,
and so forth? And this question proved fatal to the “energeticist”
philosophy, that attempt to disguise old epistemological errors by a
“new” terminology.

Here are examples of how the energeticist Ostwald got into a muddle. In
the preface to his _Lectures on Natural Philosophy_^([1]) he declares
that he regards “as a great gain the simple and natural removal of the
old difficulties in the way of uniting the concepts matter and spirit by
subordinating both to the concept energy.” This is not a gain, but a
loss, because the question whether epistemological investigation
(Ostwald does not clearly realise that he is raising an epistemological
and not a chemical issue!) is to be conducted along materialist or
idealist lines is not being solved but is being confused by an arbitrary
use of the term “energy.” Of course, if we “subordinate” both matter and
mind to this concept, the _verbal_ annihilation of the antithesis is
beyond question, but the absurdity of the belief in sprites and
hobgoblins, for instance, is not removed by calling it “energetics.” On
page 394 of Ostwald’s _Lectures_ we read: “That all external events may
be presented as an interaction of energies can be most simply explained
if our mental processes are themselves energetic and impose
_(aufprägen)_ this property of theirs on all external phenornena.” This
is pure idealism: it is not our thought that reflects the transformation
of energy in the external world, but the external world that reflects a
certain “property” of our mind! The American philosopher Hibben,
pointing to this and similar passages in Ostwald’s _Lectures,_ aptly
says that Ostwald “appears in a Kantian disguise": the explicability of
the phenomena of the external world is deduced from the properties of
our mind! “It is obvious therefore,” says Hibben, “that if the primary  
concept of energy is so defined as to embrace psychical phenomena, we
have no longer the simple concept of energy as understood and recognised
in scientific circles or among the _Energetiker_ themselves....”[J. G.
Hibben, “The Theory of Energetics and Its Philosophical Bearings,” _The
Monist,_ Vol. XIII, No. 3, April 1903, pp. 329-30.] The transformation
of energy is regarded by science as an objective process independent of
the minds of men and of the experience of mankind, that is to say, it is
regarded materialistically. And by energy, Ostwald himself in many
instances, probably in the vast majority of instances, means _material_
motion.

And this accounts for the remarkable phenomenon that Bogdanov, a
disciple of Ostwald, having become a disciple of Mach, began to reproach
Ostwald not because he does not adhere consistently to a materialistic
view of energy, but because he admits the materialistic view of energy
(and at times even takes it as his basis). The materialists criticise
Ostwald because he lapses into idealism, because he attempts to
reconcile materialism and idealism. Bogdanov criticises Ostwald from the
_idealist_ standpoint. In 1906 he wrote: “. . . Ostwald’s energetics,
hostile to atomism but for the rest closely akin to the old materialism,
enlisted my heartiest sympathy. I soon noticed, however, an important
contradiction in his _Naturphilosohhie_ : although he frequently
emphasises the _purely methodological_ significance of the concept
‘energy,’ in a great number of instances he himself fails to adhere to
it. He every now and again converts ‘energy’ from a pure symbol of
correlations between the facts of experience into the _substance_ of
experience, into the ‘world stuff’” _(Empirio-Monism,_ Bk. III, pp.
xvi-xvii).

Energy is a pure symbol! After this Bogdanov may dispute as much as he
pleases with the “empirio-symbolist” Yushkevich, with the “pure
Machians,” the empirio-criticists, etc.—from the standpoint of the
materialist it is a dispute between a man who believes in a yellow devil
and a man who believes in a green devil. For the important thing is not
the differences between Bogdanov and the other Machians, but what they
have in common, to wit: the _idealist_ interpretation of “experience”
and “energy,” the denial of objective reality, adaptation to which
constitutes human experience and the copying of which constitutes the
only scientific “methodology” and scientific “energetics.”

“It [Ostwald’s energetics] is indifferent to the material of the world,
it is fully compatible with both the old materialism and pan-psychism”
_(i.e.,_ philosophical idealism?) (p. xvii). And Bogdanov departed from
muddled energetics _not_ by the materialist road _but by the idealist_
road. . . . “When energy is represented as substance it is nothing but
the old materialism minus the absolute atoms—materialism with a
correction in the sense of the _continuity_ of the existing” _(ibid_.).
Yes, Bogdanov left the “old” materialism, _i.e.,_ the metaphysical
materialism of the scientists, not for _dialectical_ materialism, which
he understood as little in 1906 as he did in 1899, but for idealism and
fideism; for no educated representative of modern fideism, no
immanentist, no “neo-criticist,” and so forth, will object to the
“methodological” conception of energy, to its interpretation as a “pure
symbol of correlation of the facts of experience.” Take Paul Carus, with
whose mental make-up we have already become sufficiently acquainted, and
you will find that this Machian criticises Ostwald _in the very same way
as Bogdanov_ : “. . . Materialism and energetics are exactly in the same
predicament” _(The Monist,_ Vol. XVII, 1907, No. 4, p. 536). “We are
very little helped by materialism when we are told that everything is
matter, that bodies are matter, and that thoughts are merely a function
of matter, and Professor Ostwald’s energetics is not a whit better when
it tells us that matter is energy, and that the soul too is only a
factor of energy” (p. 533).

Ostwald’s energetics is a good example of how quickly a “new”
terminology becomes fashionable, and how quickly it turns out that a
somewhat altered mode of expression can in no way eliminate fundamental
philosophical questions and fundamental philosophical trends. Both
materialism and idealism can be expressed in terms of “energetics” (more
or less consistently, of course) just as they can be expressed in terms
of “experience,” and the like. Energeticist physics is a source of new
idealist attempts to conceive motion without matter—because of the
disintegration of particles of matter which hitherto had been accounted
non-disintegrable and because of the discovery of heretofore unknown
forms of material motion.

  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] Wilhelm Ostwald, _Vorlesungen über Naturphilosophie,_ 2 Aufl.,
Leipzig, 1902, S. viii. —_Lenin_

[2] Lenin is referring to a speech made at the Second Congress of the
R.S.D.L.P. by the “Economist” Akimov, who opposed the Party programme
put forward by Iskra, one of his arguments being that in the programme
the word “proletariat” occurred as the object, not the subject, of the
sentence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 4. THE TWO TRENDS IN MODERN PHYSICS AND ENGLISH SPIRITUALISM


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Five: The Recent Revolution in Natural Science and Philosophical Idealism )

4. The Two Trends in Modern Physics and English Spiritualism

In order to illustrate concretely the philosophical battle raging in
present-day literature over the various conclusions drawn from the new
physics, we shall let certain of the direct participants in the “fray”
speak for themselves, and we shall begin with the English. The physicist
Arthur W. Rücker defends one trend—from the standpoint of the natural
scientist; the philosopher James Ward another trend—from the standpoint
of epistemology.

At the meeting of the British Association held in Glasgow in 1901, A. W.
Rücker, the president of the physics section, chose as the subject of
his address the question of the value of physical theory and especially
the doubts that have arisen as to the existence of atoms, and of the
ether. The speaker referred to the physicists Poincaré and Poynting (an
English man who shares the views of the symbolists, or Machians), who
raised this problem, to the philosopher Ward, and to E. Haeckel’s famous
book and attempted to present his own views.^([1])

“The question at issue,” said Rücker, “is whether the hypotheses which
are at the base of the scientihc theories now most generally accepted,
are to be regarded as accurate descriptions of the constitution of the
universe around us, or merely as convenient fictions.” (In the terms
used in our controversy with Bogdanov, Yushkevich and Co.: are they a
copy of objective reality, of moving matter, or are they only a
“methodology,” a “pure symbol,” mere “forms of organisation of
experience"?) Rücker agrees that in practice there may prove to be no
difference between the two theories; the direction of a river can be
determined as well by one who examines only the blue streak on a map or
diagram as by one who knows that this streak represents a real river.
Theory, from the standpoint of a convenient fiction, will be an “aid to
memory,” a means of “producing order” in our observations in accordance
with some artificial system, of “arranging   our knowledge,” reducing it
to equations, etc. We can, for instance, confine ourselves to declaring
heat to be a form of motion or energy, thus exchanging “a vivid
conception of moving atoms for a colourless statement of heat energy,
the real nature of which we do not attempt define.” While fully
recognising the possibility of achieving great scientific successes by
this method, Rücker “ventures to assert that the exposition of such a
system of tactics cannot be regarded as the last word of science in the
struggle for the truth.” The questions still force themselves upon us:
“Can we argue back from the phenomenon displayed by matter to the
constitution of matter itself; whether we have any reason to believe
that the sketch which science has already drawn is to some extent a
copy, and not a mere dia gram of the truth?”

Analysing the problem of the structure of matter, Rücker takes air as an
example, saying that it consists of gases and that science resolves “an
elementary gas into a mixture of atoms and ether. . . . There are those
who cry ‘Halt’; molecules and atoms cannot be directly perceived; they
are mere conceptions, which have their uses, but cannot be regarded as
realities.” Rücker meets this objection by referring to one of
numberless instances in the development of science: the rings of Saturn
appear to be a continuous mass when observed through a telescope. The
mathematicians proved by calculation that this is impossible and
spectral analysis corroborated the conclusion reached on the basis of
the calculations. Another objection: properties are attributed to atoms
and ether such as our senses do not disclose in ordinary matter. Rücker
answers this also, referring to such examples as the diffusion of gases
and liquids, etc. A number of facts, observations and experiments prove
that matter consists of discrete particles or grains. Whether these
particles, atoms, are distinct from the surrounding “original medium” or
“basic medium” (ether), or whether they are parts of this medium in a
particular state, is still an open question, and has no bearing on the
theory of the existence of atoms. There is no ground for denying _a
priori_ the evidence of experiments showing that “quasi-material
substances” exist which differ from ordinary matter (atoms and ether).
Particular errors are here inevitable, but the aggregate of scientific  
data leaves no room for doubting the existence of atoms and molecules.

Rücker then refers to the new data on the structure of atoms, which
consist of corpuscles (electrons) charged with negative electricity, and
notes the similarities in the results of various experiments and
calculations on the size of molecules: the “first approximation” gives a
diameter of about 100 millimicrons (millionths of a millimetre).
Omitting Rücker’s particular remarks and his criticism of
neo-vitalism,^([3]) we quote his conclusions:

“Those who belittle the ideas which have of late governed the advance of
scientific theory, too often assume that there is no alternative between
the opposing assertions that atoms and the ether are mere figments of
the scientific imagination, and that, on the other hand, a mechanical
theory of the atoms and the ether, which is now confessedly imperfect,
would, if it could be perfected, give us a full and adequate
representation of the underlying realities. For my part I believe that
there is a _via media_.” A man in a dark room may discern objects dimly,
but if he does not stumble over the furniture and does not walk into a
looking-glass instead of through a door, it means that he sees some
things correctly. There is no need, therefore, either to renounce the
claim to penetrate below the surface of nature, or to claim that we have
already fully unveiled the mystery of the world around us. “It may be
granted that we have not yet framed a consistent image either of the
nature of the atoms or of the ether in which they exist, but I have
tried to show that in spite of the tentative nature of some of our
theories, in spite of many outstanding difficulties, the atomic theory
unifies so many facts, simplifies so much that is complicated, that we
have a right to insist—at all events until an equally intelligible rival
hypothesis is produced—that the main structure of our theory is true;
that atoms are not merely aids to puzzled mathematicians, but physical
realities.”

That is how Rücker ended his address. The reader will see that the
speaker did not deal with epistemology, but as a matter of fact,
doubtless in the name of a host of scientists, he was essentially
expounding an instinctive materialist standpoint. The gist of his
position is this: The theory   of physics is a copy (becoming ever more
exact) of objective reality. The world is matter in motion, our
knowledge of which grows ever more profound. The inaccuracies of
Rücker’s philosophy are due to an unnecessary defence of the
“mechanical” (why not electromagnetic?) theory of ether motions and to a
failure to understand the relation between relative and absolute truth.
This physicist lacks _only_ a knowledge of _dialectical_ materialism (if
we do not count, of course, those very important social considerations
which induce English professors to call themselves “agnostics").

Let us now see how the spiritualist James Ward criticised I this
philosophy: “Naturalism is not science, and the mechanical theory of
Nature, the theory which serves as its foundation, is no science either.
. . . Nevertheless, though Naturalism and the natural sciences, the
Mechanical Theory of the Universe and mechanics as a science are
logically distinct, yet the two are at first sight very similar and
historically are very closely connected. Between the natural sciences
and philosophies of the idealist (or spiritualist) type there is indeed
no danger of confusion, for all such philosophies necessarily involve
criticism of the epistemological assumptions which science unconsciously
makes.”^([2]) True! The natural sciences _unconsciously_ assume that
their teachings reflect objective reality, and _only_ such a philosophy
is reconcilable with the natural sciences! “. . . Not so with
Naturalism, which is as innocent of any theory of knowledge as science
itself. In fact Naturalism, like Materialism, is only physics treated as
metaphysics. . . . Naturalism is less dogmatic than Materialism, no
doubt, owing to its agnostic reservation as to the nature of ultimate
reality; but it insists emphatically on the priority of the material
aspect of its Unknowable.”

The materialist treats physics as metaphysics! A familiar argument. By
metaphysics is meant the recognition of an objective reality outside
man. The spiritualists agree with the Kantians and Humeans in such
reproaches against materialism. This is understandable; for without
doing away with the _objective_ reality of things, bodies and objects  
known to everyone, it is impossible to clear the road for “real
conceptions” in Rehmke’s sense! . . .

“When the essentially philosophical question, how best to systematise
experience as a whole [a plagiarism from Bogdanov, Mr. Ward!], arises,
the naturalist . . . contends that we must begin from the physical side.
Then only are the facts precise, determinate, and rigorously
concatenated: every thought that ever stirred the human heart . . . can,
it holds, be traced to a perfectly definite redistribution of matter and
motion. . . . That propositions of such philosophic generality and scope
are legitimate deductions from physical science, few, if any, of our
modern physicists are bold enough directly to maintain. But many of them
consider that their science itself is attacked by those who seek to lay
bare the latent metaphysics, the physical realism, on which the
Mechanical Theory of the Universe rests. . . . The criticism of this
theory in the preceding lectures has been so regarded [by Rücker]. . . .
In point of fact my criticism [of this “metaphysics,” so detested by all
the Machians too] rests throughout on the expositions of a school of
physicists—if one might call them so—steadily increasing in number and
influence, who reject entirely the almost medieval realism. . . . This
realism has remained so long unquestioned, that to challenge it now
seems to many to spell scientific anarchy. And yet it surely verges on
extravagance to suppose that men like Kirchhoff or Poincaré—to mention
only two out of many distinguished names—who do challenge it, are
seeking ‘to invalidate the methods of science.’ . . . To distinguish
them from the old school, whom we may fairly term physical realists, we
might call the new school physical symbolists. The term is not very
happy, but it may at least serve to emphasise the one difference between
the two which now specially concerns us. The question at issue is very
simple. Both schools start, of course, from the same perceptual
experiences; both employ an abstract conceptual system, differing in
detail but essentially the same; both resort to the same methods of
verification. But the one believes that it is getting nearer to the
ultimate reality and leaving mere appearances behind it; the other
believes that it is only substituting a generalised descriptive scheme
that is intellectually manageable, for the complexity of concrete  
facts. . . . In either view the value of physics as systematic knowledge
_about_ [Ward’s italics] things is unaffected; its possibilities of
future extension and of practical application are in either case the
same. But the speculative difference between the two is immense, and in
this respect the question which is right becomes important.”

The question is put by this frank and consistent spiritualist with
remarkable truth and clarity. Indeed, the difference between the two
schools in modern physics is _only_ philosophical, only epistemological.
Indeed, the basic distinction is _only_ that one recognises the
“ultimate” (he should have said objective) reality reflected by our
theory, while the other denies it, regarding theory as only a
systematisation of experience, a system of empirio-symbols, and so on
and so forth. The new physics, having found new aspects of matter and
new forms of its motion, raised the old philosophical questions because
of the collapse of the old physical concepts. And if the people
belonging to “intermediate” philosophical trends ("positivists,”
Humeans, Machians) are unable to put the question at issue distinctly,
it remained for the outspoken idealist Ward to tear off all veils.

“. . . Sir A. W. Rücker . . . devoted his Inaugural Address to a defence
of physical realism against the symbolic inter pretations recently
advocated by Professors Poincaré and Poynting and by myself” (pp.
305-06; and in other parts of his book Ward adds to this list the names
of Duhem, Pearson and Mach; see Vol. II, pp. 161, 63, 57, 75, 83, etc.).

“. . . He [Rücker] is constantly talking of ‘mental pictures,’ while
constantly protesting that atoms and ether must be more than these. Such
procedure practically amounts to saying: In this case I can form no
other picture, and therefore the reality must be like it. . . . He
[Rücker] is fair enough to allow the abstract possibility of a different
mental picture. . . . Nay, he allows ‘the tentative nature of some of
our theories’; he admits ‘many outstanding difficulties.’ After all,
then, he is only defending a working hypothesis, and one, moreover, that
has lost greatly in prestige in the last half century. But if the atomic
and other theories of the constitution of matter are but working
hypotheses, and hypotheses strictly confined to physical phenomena,
there is   no justification for a theory which maintains that mechanism
is fundamental everywhere and reduces the facts of life and mind to
epiphenomena—makes them, that is to say, a degree more phenomenal, a
degree less real than matter and motion. Such is the mechanical theory
of the universe. Save as he seems unwittingly to countenance that, we
have then no quarrel with Sir Arthur Rücker” (pp. 314-15).

It is, of course, utterly absurd to say that materialism ever maintained
that consciousness is “less” real, or necessarily professed a
“mechanical,” and not an electromagnetic, or some other, immeasurably
more complex, picture of the world of _moving matter_. But in a truly
adroit manner, much more skilfully than our Machians _(i.e.,_ muddled
idealists), the outspoken and straightforward idealist Ward _seizes
upon_ the weak points in “instinctive” natural-historical materialism,
as, for instance, its inability to explain the relation of relative and
absolute truth. Ward turns somersaults and declares that since truth is
relative, approximate, only “tentative,” it cannot reflect reality! But,
on the other hand, the question of atoms, etc., as “a working
hypothesis” is very correctly put by the spiritualist. Modern, cultured
fideism (which Ward directly deduces from his spiritualism) _does not
think of demanding_ anything more than the declaration that the concepts
of natural science are “working hypotheses.” We will, sirs, surrender
science to you scientists provided you surrender epistemology,
philosophy to us—such is the condition for the cohabitation of the
theologians and professors in the “advanced” capitalist countries.

Among the other points on which Ward connects his epistemology with the
“new” physics must be counted his deter mined attack on _matter_. What
is matter and what is energy?—asks Ward, mocking at the plethora of
hypotheses and their contradictoriness. Is it ether or ethers?—or,
perhaps, some new “perfect fluid,” arbitrarily endowed with new and
improbable qualities? And Ward’s conclusion is: “ . . . we find nothing
definite except movement left. Heat is a mode of motion, elasticity is a
mode of motion, light and magnetism are modes of motion. Nay, mass
itself is, in the end, supposed to be but a mode of motion of a
something that is neither solid, nor liquid nor gas, that is neither  
itself a body nor an aggregate of bodies, that is not phenomenal and
must not be noumenal, a veritable apeiron [a term used by the Greek
philosophers signifying: infinite, boundless] on which we can impose our
own terms” (Vol. I, p. 140).

The spiritualist is true to himself when he divorces motion from matter.
The movement of bodies is transformed in nature into a movement of
something that is not a body with a constant mass, into a movement of an
unknown charge of an unknown electricity in an unknown ether—this
dialectics of _material_ transformation, performed in the laboratory and
in the factory, serves in the eyes of the idealist (as in the eyes of
the public at large, and of the Machians) not as a confirmation of
materialist dialectics, but as evidence against materialism: “ . . . The
mechanical theory, as a professed explanation of the world, receives its
death-blow from the progress of mechanical physics itself” (p. 143). The
world is matter in motion, we reply, and the laws of its motion are
reflected by mechanics in the case of moderate velocities and by the
electromagnetic theory in the case of great velocities. “Extended,
solid, indestructible atoms have always been the stronghold of
materialistic views of the universe. But, unhappily for such views, the
hard, extended atom was not equal to the demands which increasing
knowledge made upon it” (p. 144). The destructibility of the atom, its
inexhaustibility, the mutability of all forms of matter and of its
motion, have always been the stronghold of dialectical materialism. All
boundaries in nature are conditional, relative, movable, and express the
gradual approximation of our mind towards the knowledge of matter. But
this does not in any way prove that nature, matter itself, is a symbol,
a conventional sign, _i.e.,_ the product of our mind. The electron is to
the atom as a full stop in this book is to the size of a building 200
feet long, 100 feet broad, and 50 feet high (Lodge); it moves with a
velocity as high as 270,000 kilometres per second; its mass is a
function of its velocity; it makes 500 trillion revolutions in a
second—all this is much more complicated than the old mechanics; but it
is, nevertheless, movement of matter in space and time. Human reason has
discovered many amazing things in nature and will discover still more,
and will thereby   increase its power over nature. But this does not
mean that nature is the creation of our mind or of abstract mind,
_i.e.,_ of Ward’s God, Bogdanov’s “substitution,” etc.

“Rigorously carried out as a theory of the real world, that ideal
_[i.e.,_ the ideal of “mechanism"] lands us in nihilism: all changes are
motions, for motions are the only changes we can understand, and so what
moves, to be understood, must itself be motion” (p. 166). “As I have
tried to show, and as I believe, the very advance of physics is proving
the most effectual cure for this ignorant faith in matter and motion as
the inmost substance rather than the most abstract symbols of the sum of
existence. . . . We can never get to God through a mere mechanism”
(p. 180).

Well, well, this is exactly in the spirit of the _Studies_ “_in” the
Philosophy of Marxism_ ! Mr. Ward, you ought to address yourself to
Lunacharsky, Yushkevich, Bazarov and Bogdanov. They are a little more
“shamefaced” than you are, but they preach the same doctrine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] The British Association at Glasgow, 1901. Presidential Address by
Professor Arthur W. Rücker, in _The Scientific American_. _Supplement,_
1901, Nos. 1345 and 1346. —_Lenin_

[2] James Ward. _Naturalism and Agnosticism,_ 1906, Vol. I, p. 303.
—_Lenin_

[3] Nec-vitalism—an idealist trend in biology which arose at the end of
the nineteenth century in opposition to the materialist world outlook
and Darwinism. Its representatives (Wilhelm Roux, Hans Driesch, Jakob
Uexkiill and others) revived the anti-scientific views of vitalism. They
attempted to explain the phenomena of life and the purposiveness of
living organisms by the action of special non-material factois (“life
force”, “entelechy”, etc.), thus making living nature fundamentally
different from non-living nature. The fallacious, anti-scientific
character of neo-vitalism was exposed in the works of the materialist
biologists (Ernst Haeckel, K. A. Timiryazev, I. P. Pavlov, etc.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 5. THE TWO TRENDS IN MODERN PHYSICS, AND GERMAN IDEALISM


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Five: The Recent Revolution in Natural Science and Philosophical Idealism )

5. The Two Trends in Modern Physics, and German Idealism

In 1896, the well-known Kantian idealist Hermann Cohen, with unusually
triumphant exultation, wrote an introduction to the fifth edition of the
_Geschichte des Materialismus,_ the falsified history of materialism
written by F. Albert Lange. “Theoretical idealism,” exclaims Cohen
(p. xxvi), “has already begun to shake the materialism of the natural
scientists, and perhaps in only a little while will defeat it
completely.” Idealism is permeating _(Durchwirkung)_ the new physics.
“Atomism must give place to dynamism. . . .” “It is a remarkable turn of
affairs that research into the chemical problem of substance should have
led to a fundamental triumph over the materialist view of matter. Just
as Thales performed the first abstraction of the idea of substance, and
linked it with speculations on the electron, so the theory of
electricity was destined to cause the greatest revolution in the
conception of matter and, through the transformation of matter into
force, bring about the victory of idealism” (p. xxix).

Hermann Cohen is as clear and definite as James Ward in pointing out the
_fundamental_ philosophical trends, and does not lose himself (as our
Machians do) in petty distinctions between this and that energeticist,
symbolist, empirio-criticist, empirio-monist idealism, and so forth.
Cohen takes the _fundamental_ philosophical trend of the school of
physics that is now associated with the names of Mach, Poincaré and
others and correctly describes this trend as _idealist_. “The
transformation of matter into force” is here for Cohen the most
important triumph of idealism, just as it was for the “ghost-seeing”
scientists—whom J. Dietzgen exposed in 1869. Electricity is proclaimed a
collaborator of idealism, because it has destroyed the old theory of the
structure of matter, shattered the atom and discovered new forms of
material motion, so unlike the old, so totally uninvestigated and
unstudied, so unusual and “miraculous,” that it permits nature to be
presented as _non-material_ (spiritual, mental, psychical) motion.
Yesterday’s limit to our knowledge of the infinitesimal particles of
matter has disappeared, hence—concludes the idealist philosopher—matter
has disappeared (but thought remains). Every physicist and every
engineer knows that electricity is (material) motion, but nobody knows
clearly _what_ is moving, hence—concludes the idealist philosopher—we
can dupe the philosophically uneducated with the seductively
“economical” proposition: let us _conceive_ motion _without matter_. . .
.

Hermann Cohen tries to enlist the famous physicist Heinrich Hertz as
llis ally. Hertz is ours—he is a Kantian, we sometimes find him
admitting the _a priori,_ he says. Hertz is ours, he is a
Machian—contends the Machian Kleinpeter—for in Hertz we have glimpses of
“the same subjectivist view of the nature of our concepts as in the case
of Mach.”^([1]) This strange dispute as to _where_ Hertz belongs is a
good example of how the idealist philosophers seize on the minutest
error, the slightest vagueness of expression on the part of renowned
scientists in order to justify their refurbished defence of fideism. As
a matter of fact, Hertz’s philosophical preface   to his _Mechanik_[2]
displays the usual standpoint of the scientist who has been intimidated
by the professorial hue and cry against the “metaphysics” of
materialism, but who nevertheless cannot overcome his instinctive
conviction of the reality of the external world. This has been
acknowledged by Kleinpeter himself, who on the one hand casts to the
mass of readers thoroughly false popularly-written pamphlets on the
theory of knowledge of _natural science,_ in which Mach figures side by
side with Hertz, while on the other, in specifically philosophical
articles, he admits that “Hertz, as opposed to Mach and Pearson, still
clings to the prejudice that all physics can be explained in a
mechanistic way,”^([3]) that he retains the concept of the
thing-in-itself and “the usual standpoint of the physicists,” and that
Hertz still adheres to “a picture of the universe in itself,” and so
on.^([4])

It is interesting to note Hertz’s view of energetics. He writes: “If we
inquire into the real reason why physics at the present time prefers to
express itself in terms of energetics, we may answer that it is because
in this way it best avoids talking about things of which it knows very
little. . . . Of course, we are now convinced that ponderable matter
consists of atoms; and in certain cases we have fairly definite ideas of
the magnitude of these atoms and of their motions. But the form of the
atoms, their connection, their motions in most cases, all these are
entirely hidden from us. . . . So that our conception of atoms is
therefore in itself an important and interesting object for further
investigations, but is not particularly adapted to serve as a known and
secure foundation for mathematical theories” (op. cit., Vol. III, p.
21). Hertz expected that further study of the ether would provide an
explanation of the “nature of traditional matter . . . its inertia and
gravitational force” (Vol. I, p. 354).

It is evident from this that the possibility of a non-materialist view
of energy did not even occur to Hertz. Energetics served the
philosophers as an excuse to desert materialism   for idealism. The
scientist regards energetics as a convenient method of expressing the
laws of material motion at a period when, if we may so express it,
physicists had left the atom but had not yet arrived at the electron.
This period is to a large extent not yet at an end; one hypothesis
yields place to another; nothing whatever is known of the positive
electron; only three months ago (June 22, 1908), Jean Becquerel reported
to the French Academy of Science that he had succeeded in discovering
this “new component part of matter” _(Comptes rendus des séances de
l’Académie des Sciences,_ p. 1311). How could idealist philosophy
refrain from taking advantage of such an opportunity, when “matter” was
still being “sought” by the human mind and was therefore no more than a
“symbol,” etc.

Another German idealist, one far more reactionary than Cohen, Eduard von
Hartmann, devoted a whole book to the world outlook of modern physics
_(Die Weltanschauung der modernen Physik,_ Leipzig, 1902). We are, of
course, not interested in the specific arguments of the author in favour
of his own variety of idealism. For us it is important only to point out
that this idealist notes the same phenomena as Rey, Ward and Cohen.
“Modern physics had grown up on a realist basis,” says Hartmann, “and it
was only the Neo-Kantian and agnostic movement of our own time that led
it to re-interpret its data in an idealist spirit” (p. 218). According
to Hartmann, three epistemological systems constitute the basis of
modern physics—hylo-kinetics (from the Greek _hyle_—matter, and
_kinesis_—motion—_i.e.,_ the recognition of physical phenomena as matter
in motion), energetics, and dynamism _(i.e.,_ the recognition of force
without substance). Of course, the idealist Hartmann favours “dynamism,”
from which he draws the conclusion that the laws of nature are
world-thought, in a word, he “substitutes” the psychical for physical
nature. But he is forced to admit that hylo-kinetics has the majority of
physicists on its side, that it is the system that “is most frequently
employed” (p. 190), that its serious defect is “materialism and atheism,
which threaten from pure hylo-kinetics” (p. 189). This author quite
justly regards energetics as an intermediary system and calls it
agnosticism (p. 136). Of course,   it is an “ally of pure dynamism, for
it dethrones substance” (pp. vi, 192), but Hartmann dislikes its
agnosticism as a form of “Anglomania,” which is incompatible with the
genuine idealism of a true-German reactionary.

It is highly instructive to see how this irreconcilable partisan
idealist (non-partisans in philosophy are just as hopelessly
thick-headed as they are in politics) explains to the physicists what it
means to follow one epistemological trend or another. “Only a very few
of the physicists who follow this fashion,” writes Hartmann in reference
to the idealist interpretation of the latest results in physics,
“realise the full scope and implications of such an interpretation. They
have failed to observe that physics with its specific laws has retained
significance only in so far as, despite its idealism, it has adhered to
_realistic_ basic propositions, _viz_., the existence of
things-in-themselves, their real mutability in time, real causality. . .
. Only by granting these realistic premises (the transcendental validity
of causality, time and three-dimensional space), _i.e.,_ only on the
condition that nature, of whose laws physics speaks, coincides with a .
. . realm of things-in themselves, can one speak of natural laws as
distinct from psychological laws. Only if natural laws operate in a
realm independent of our mind can they serve as an explanation of the
fact that the logically necessary effects of our images are always
images of the natural-historically necessary effects of the unknown
which they reflect or symbolise in our consciousness” (pp. 218-19).

Hartmann rightly feels that the idealism of the new physics is nothing
but a _fashion,_ and not a serious philosophical turn away from
natural-historical materialism; and he, therefore, correctly explains to
the physicists that in order to transform the “fashion” into consistent,
integral philosophical idealism it is necessary radically to modify the
doctrine of the objective reality of time, space, causality and natural
law. We cannot regard only atoms, electrons and ether as mere symbols,
as a mere “working hypothesis": time, space, the laws of nature and the
whole external world must also be proclaimed a “working hypothesis.”
Either materialism, or the universal substitution of the psychical for
the whole of physical nature; those   anxious to confound the two are
legion, but we and Bogdanov are not of their number.

Among the German physicists, Ludwig Boltzmann, who died in 1906,
systematically combated the Machian tendency. We have already pointed
out that as against those who were “carried away by the new
epistemological dogmas” he simply and clearly reduced Machism to
solipsism (see above, Chap. I, § 6). Boltzmann, of course, was afraid to
call himself a materialist and even explicitly stated that he did not
deny the existence of God.^([5]) But his theory of knowledge is
essentially materialistic, and expresses—as is admitted by
S. Günther,^([6]) the historian of natural science in the nineteenth
century—the views of the majority of scientists. “We know,” says
Boltzmann, “of the existence of all things solely from the impressions
they make on our senses” (op. cit., p. 29). Theory is an “image” (or
copy) of nature, of the external world (p. 77). To those who say that
matter is only a complex of sense-perceptions, Boltzmann points out that
in that case other people are only the sensations of the speaker
(p. 168). These “ideologues,” as Boltzmann sometimes calls the
philosophical idealists, present us with a “subjective picture of the
world” (p. 176), whereas the author prefers a “simpler objective picture
of the world.” “The idealist compares the assertion that matter exists
as well as our sensations with the child’s opinion that a stone which is
beaten experiences pain. The realist compares the assertion that one
cannot conceive how the mental can be formed from the material, or even
from the play of atoms, with the opinion of an uneducated person who
asserts that the distance between the sun and the earth cannot be twenty
million miles, for he cannot conceive it” (p. 186). Boltzmann does not
deny that the ideal of science is to present mind and volition as
“complex actions of particles of matter” (p. 396).

L. Boltzmann frequently polemicised against Ostwald’s energetics from
the standpoint of a physicist, and argued that Ostwald could neither
disprove nor eliminate the formula   of kinetic energy (half the mass
multiplied by the square of velocity) and that he was revolving in a
vicious circle by first deducing energy from mass (by accepting the
formula of kinetic energy) and then defining mass as energy (pp. 112,
139). This reminds me of Bogdanov’s paraphrase of Mach in the third book
of his _Empirio-Monism_. “In science,” writes Bogdanov in reference to
Mach’s _Mechanik,_[111] “the concept matter is reduced to the
coefficient of mass as it appears in the equations of mechanics, upon
accurate analysis, how ever, the coefficient of mass proves to be the
reciprocal of the acceleration when two physical body-complexes
interact” (p. 146). It is evident that if a certain _body_ is taken as a
unit, the motion (mechanical) of all other bodies can be expressed as a
mere relation of acceleration. But this does not at all mean that
“bodies” _(i.e.,_ matter) disappear or cease to exist independently of
our mind. When the whole world is reduced to the movement of electrons,
it will be possible to eliminate the electron from all equations,
because it will be everywhere assumed, and the correlation between
groups or aggregates of electrons will reduce itself to their mutual
acceleration, if the forms of motion prove to be as simple as those of
mechanics.

Combating the “phenomenalist” physics of Mach and Co., Boltzmann
maintained that “those who believe atomism to have been eliminated by
differential equations, cannot see the wood for the trees” (p. 144). “If
we do not wish to entertain illusions as to the significance of a
differential equation . . . we cannot doubt that this picture of the
world (expressed in differential equations) must again by its nature be
an atomic one, _i.e.,_ an instruction that the changes in time of a vast
quantity of things arranged in three-dimensional space must be thought
of in accordance with definite rules. The things can, of course, be
similar or dissimilar, unchangeable or changeable,” etc. (p. 156). “If
we are perfectly clear,” said Boltzmann in an address delivered to the
Congress of Scientists held in Munich in 1899, “that the phenomenalists
cloaked in differential equations likewise base themselves on atom-like
discrete units _(Einzelwesen)_ which they have to picture as possessing
now certain properties now others for each group of phenomena, the need
for a simplified, uniform atomism will soon again be felt” (p. 223).  
The electron theory “is developing into an atomic theory of electricity
as a whole” (p. 357). The unity of nature is revealed in the
“astonishing analogy” between the differential equations of the various
realms of phenomena. “The same equations can be regarded as solving the
problems of hydro-dynamics and of the theory of potentials. The theory
of vortices in fluids and the theory of friction in gases _(Gasreibung)_
reveal a most astonishing analogy to the theory of electromagnetism,
etc.” (p. 7). Those who accept “the theory of universal substitution”
cannot escape the question: Who was it that thought of “substituting”
physical nature so uniformly?

As if in answer to those who brush aside “the physicist of the old
school,” Boltzmann relates in detail how certain specialists in
“physical chemistry” are adopting an epistemological position contrary
to that of Machism. Vaubel, the author of “one of the best”
comprehensive works of 1903 (according to Boltzmann), “takes up a
definitely hostile attitude towards the so-called phenomenalism so often
recommended today” (p. 381). “He tries rather to obtain as concrete and
clear an idea as possible of the nature of atoms and molecules and of
the forces and agencies acting between them, and this idea he attempts
to bring into conformity with the most recent experiments in this field
[ions, electrons, radium, Zeeman effect, etc.]. . . . The author
strictly adheres to the dualism of matter and energy,^([7]) which have
this in common that each has a special law of conservation. In regard to
matter, the author also holds fast to the dualism between ponderable
matter and ether, yet regards the latter as material in the strictest
sense” (p. 381). In the second volume of his work (theory of
electricity) the author “from the very outset takes the view that the
phenomena of electricity are determined by the interaction and movement
of atom-like entities, the electrons” (p. 383).

Hence, we find that what the spiritualist James Ward admitted to be true
of England applies also to Germany, namely, that the physicists of the
realistic school systematise   the facts and discoveries of recent years
no less successfully than the physicists of the symbolist school and
that the essential difference between them consists “_only_” in their
epistemological points of view.[8]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] _Archiv für systematische Philosophie,_ Bd. V, 1898-99, S. 169-70.
—_Lenin_

[2] Heinrich Hertz, _Gesammelte Werke,_ Bd. III, Leipzig, 1894, esp. S.
1, 2, 49. —_Lenin_

[3] _Kantstudien,_ VIII, Band, 1903, S. 309. —_Lenin_

[4] _The Monist,_ Vol. XVI, 1906, No. 2, p. 164; an article on Mach’s
“Monism." —_Lenin_

[5] Ludwig Boltzmann, _Populäre Schriften,_ Leipzig, 1905, S. 187.
—_Lenin_

[6] Siegmund Günther, _Geschichte der anorganischen Naturwissenschaften
im 19. Jahrhnndert_ [_History of the Inorganic Sciences in the
Nineteenth Century_], Berlin, 1901, S. 942 und 941. —_Lenin_

[7] Boltzmann wishes to say that the author does not attempt to conceive
motion without matter. To speak of dualism here is ridiculous.
Philosophical monism and dualism consist respectively in a consistent or
inconsistent adherence to materialism or idealism. —_Lenin_

[8] The work of Erich Becher, _Philosophical Premises of the Exact
Sciences (Philosophische Votaussetzungen der exakten
Naturwissenschaften,_ Leipzig, 1907), with which I became acquainted
only after my book had been completed, confirms what has been said in
this paragraph. Holdin, closest of all to the epistemological point of
view of Helmholtz and Boltzmann, that is, to a “shamefaced” and
incompletely thought-out materialism, the author devotes his work to a
defence and interpretation of the fundamental premises of physics and
chemistry. This defence naturally becomes converted into a fight against
the fashionable but increasingly-resisted Machian trend in physics
_(cf_. p. 91, etc.). E. Becher correctly characterises this tendency as
“_subjective positivism_” (p. iii) and reduces the central point of his
objection to it to a proof of the “hypothesis” of the external world
(Chapters II-VII), to a proof of its “existence independently of human
perceptions” _(vom Wahrgenommenawerden unabhängige Existenz)_. The
denial of this “hypothesis” by the Machians frequently leads the latter
to _solipsism_ (pp. 78-82, etc.). “Mach’s view that sensations and
complexes of sensations, and not the external world” (p. 138), are the
only subject matter of science, Becher calls “sensationalist monism”
_(Empfindungsmonismus)_ and classes it with the “purely
conscientialistic tendencies.” This clumsy and absurd term is
constructed from the Latin word _conscientia_—consciousness, and means
nothing but philosophical idealism _(cf_. p. 156). In the last two
chapters of the book E. Becher quite skilfully compares the old
mechanical theory with the new electrical theory of matter and
world-picture (the “kinetico-elastic,” as the author puts it, with the
“kinetico-electric” conception of nature). The latter theory, based on
the electron theory, is a step forward in knowledge of the unity of the
world; according to this theory the “elements of the material world are
electrical charges” _(Ladungen,_ p. 223). “Every purely kinetic
conception of nature knows nothing save a certain number of moving
objects, whether they are called electrons or something else. The state
of motion of these objects in successive time intervals is consistently
determined by their position and state of motion in the preceding time
interval” (p. 225). The chief defect of Becher’s book is his absolute
ignorance of dialectical materialism. This ignorance frequently leads
him into confusion and absurdity, on which it is impossible to dwell
here. —_Lenin_

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 6. THE TWO TRENDS IN MODERN PHYSICS AND FRENCH FIDEISM


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Five: The Recent Revolution in Natural Science and Philosophical Idealism )

6. The Two Trends in Modern Physics and French Fideism

In France, idealist philosophy has seized upon the vacillations of
Machian physics with no less determination. We have already seen how the
neo-criticists greeted Mach’s   _Mechanik_ and how they immediately
discerned the idealist character of the principles of Mach’s philosophy.
The French Machian, Henri Poincaré, was even more successful in this
respect. The most reactionary idealist philosophy, the implications of
which were definitely fideistic, immediately seized upon his theory. An
adherent of this philosophy, Le Roy, argued thus: the truths of science
are conventional signs, symbols; you have abandoned the absurd,
“metaphysical” claims to knowledge of objective reality—well then, be
logical and agree with us that science has practical significance only
for one sphere of human activity and that religion has _a no less real
significance_ for another sphere of activity; “symbolic,” Machian
science has no right to deny theology. H. Poincaré was abashed by these
conclusions and in his book _La valeur de la science_ made a special
attack on them. But just see _what_ epistemological position he was
obliged to adopt in order to rid himself of allies of the type of Le
Roy. He writes: “M. Le Roy regards the intellect as incurably impotent
only in order to give greater place to other sources of knowledge, for
instance, the heart, sentiment, instinct and faith” (pp. 214-15). “I do
not go to the limit,” he says. Scientific laws are conventions, symbols,
but “if scientific ‘recipes’ have a value as rules of action, it is
because we know that, in general at least, they are successful. But to
know this is already to know something; and if so, how can you say that
we can know nothing?” (p. 219).

H. Poincaré resorts to the criterion of practice. But he only shifts the
question without settling it; for this criterion may be interpreted in a
subjective as well as in an objective way. Le Roy also admits this
criterion for science and industry; all he denies is that this criterion
proves _objective_ truth, for such a denial suffices him for admitting
the subjective truth of religion along with the subjective truth of
science _(i.e.,_ as not existing apart from mankind). Poincaré realises
that one cannot limit oneself to a reference to practice in arguing
against Le Roy, and he passes to the question of the objectivity of
science. “What is the criterion of its objectivity? Well, it is exactly
the same as the criterion of our belief in external objects. These
objects are real in as much as the sensations   they evoke in us
_(qu’ils nous fontéprouver)_ appear to be united by some sort of
indestructible cement and not by an ephemeral accident” (pp. 269-70).

The author of such a remark may well be a great _physicist,_ but it is
absolutely indisputable that only the Voroshilov-Yushkeviches can take
him seriously as a philosopher. Materialism is declared to have been
destroyed by a “theory” which at the first onslaught of fideism _takes
refuge under the wing of materialism_ ! For it is the purest materialism
to say that sensations are evoked in us by real objects and that
“belief” in the objectivity of science is the same as “belief” in the
objective existence of external objects.

“. . . It can be said, for instance, that ether has no less reality than
any external body” (p. 270).

What an outcry our Machians would have raised had a materialist said
that! How many feeble witticisms would have been uttered at the expense
of “ethereal materialism,” and so forth. But five pages later the
founder of recent empirio-symbolism declares: “Everything that is not
thought is pure nothing, since we can think nothing but thought”
(p. 276). You are mistaken, M. Poincaré your works prove that there are
people who can only think what is entirely devoid of thought. To this
class of people belongs the notorious muddler, Georges Sorel, who
maintains that the “first two parts” of Poincaré’s book on the value of
science are written in the “spirit of Le Roy” and that therefore the two
philosophers can be “reconciled” as follows: the attempt to establish an
identity between science and the world is an illusion; there is no need
to raise the question whether science can have knowledge of nature or
not, for it is sufficient that science should correspond with the
mechanisms created by us (Georges Sorel, _Les préoccupations
metaphysiques des physiciens modernes [Metaphysical Preoccupations of
the Modern Physicists],_ Paris, 1907, pp. 77, 80, 81).

But while it is sufficient merely to mention the “philosophy” of
Poincaré and pass on, it is imperative to dwell at some length on the
work of A. Rey. We have already pointed out that the two basic trends in
modern physics, which Rey calls the “conceptualist” and the
“neo-mechanistic,” reduce themselves to the difference between the
idealist and the materialist epistemologies. We must now see how the
positivist Rey solves a problem which is diametrically opposed   to that
broached by the spiritualist James Ward and the idealists Cohen and
Hartmann, the problem, namely, not of seizing upon the philosophical
mistakes of the new physics, its leanings towards idealism, but of
rectifying these mistakes and of proving the illegitimacy of the
idealist (and fideist) conclusions drawn from the new physics.

A thread that runs through the whole of Rey’s work is the recognition of
the fact that the new physical theory of the “conceptualists” (Machians)
has been seized upon by _fideism_ (pp. 11, 17, 220, 362, etc.) and
“_philosophical idealism_” (p. 200), scepticism as to the rights of the
intellect and the rights of science (pp. 210, 220), subjectivism
(p. 311), and so forth. Therefore, Rey quite rightly makes the analysis
of the “opinions of the physicists on the objective validity of physics”
(p. 3) the _centre_ of his work.

And what are the results of this analysis?

Let us take the basic concept, the concept of experience. Rey assures us
that Mach’s subjectivist interpretation (for the sake of simplicity and
brevity we shall take Mach as the representative of the school which Rey
terms conceptualist) is a sheer misunderstanding. It is true that one of
the “outstanding new features of the philosophy of the end of the
nineteenth century” is that “empiricism, becoming ever subtler and
richer in nuances, leads to fideism, to the supremacy of faith—this same
empiricism that was once the great war engine of scepticism against the
assertions of metaphysics. Has not at bottom the real meaning of the
word ‘experience’ been distorted, little by little, by imperceptible
nuances? Experience, when returned to the conditions of existence, to
that experimental science which renders it exact and refined, leads us
to necessity and to truth” (p. 398). There is no doubt that all Machism,
in the broad sense of the term, is nothing but a distortion, by means of
imperceptible nuances, of the real meaning of the word “experience"! But
how does Rey, who accuses only the fideists of distortion, but not Mach
himself, correct this distortion? Listen. “Experience is by definition a
knowledge of the object. In physical science this definition is more in
place than anywhere else. . . . Experience is that over which our mind
has no command, that which our desires, our volition, cannot control,
that which is given and which   is not of our own making. Experience is
the object that faces _(en face du)_ the subject” (p. 314).

Here you have an example of how Rey defends Machism! What penetrating
genius Engels revealed when he dubbed the latest type of adherents of
philosophical agnosticism and phenomenalism “shamefaced materialists.”
The positivist and ardent phenomenalist, Rey, is a superb specimen of
this type. If experience is “knowledge of the object,” if “experience is
the object that faces the subject,” if experience means that “something
external _(quelque chose du de hors)_ exists and necessarily exists”
_(se pose et en se posant s’impose_—p. 324), this obviously amounts to
materialism! Rey’s phenomenalism, his ardent and emphatic assertion that
nothing exists save sensations, that the objective is that which is
generally valid, etc., etc.—all this is only a fig-leaf, an empty verbal
covering for materialism, since we are told:

“The objective is that which is given from without, that which is
imposed _(imposé)_ by experience; it is that which is not of our making,
but which is made independently of us and which to a certain extent
makes us” (p. 320). Rey defends “conceptualism” by destroying
conceptualism! The refutation of the idealist implications of Machism is
achieved only by interpreting Machism after the manner of shame faced
materialism. Having himself admitted the distinction between the two
trends in modern physics, Rey toils in the sweat of his brow to
obliterate all distinctions in the interests of the materialist trend.
Rey says of the neo-mechanist school, for instance, that it does not
admit the “least doubt, the least uncertainty” as to the objectivity of
physics (p. 237): “Here [in regard to the doctrines of this school] one
feels remote from the detours one was obliged to make from the
standpoint of the other theories of physics in order to arrive at the
assertion of this objectivity.”

But it is such “detours” of Machism that Rey conceals by casting a veil
over them in his exposition. The fundamental characteristic of
materialism is that it _starts from_ the objectivity of science, from
the recognition of objective reality reflected by science, whereas
idealism _needs_ “detours” in order, in one way or another, to “deduce”
objectivity from mind, consciousness, the “psychic.” “The neo-mechanist
_[i.e.,_ the prevailing] school in physics,” says   Rey, “_believes in
the reality_ of the physical theory just as humanity _believes in the
reality_ of the external world” (p. 234, § 22: Thesis). For this school
“theory aims at being a copy _(le décalque)_ of the object” (p. 235).

True. And this fundamental trait of the “neo-mechanist” school is
nothing but the basis of _materialist_ epistemology. No attempts of Rey
to dissociate himself from the materialists or to assure us that the
neo-mechanists are also in essence phenomenalists, etc., can mitigate
this basic fact. The essence of the difference between the
neo-mechanists (materialists who are more or less shamefaced) and the
Machians is that the latter _depart_ from this theory of knowledge, and
departing from it inevitably _fall_ into fideism.

Take Rey’s attitude to Mach’s theory of causality and necessity in
nature. Only at first glance, Rey assures us, does it appear that Mach
is “approaching scepticism” and “subjectivism” (p. 76); this “ambiguity”
_(équivoque,_ p. 115) disappears if Mach’s teaching is taken as a whole.
And Rey takes it as a whole, quotes a series of passages from the
_Wärmelehre_ [112] and the _Analyse der Empfindungen,_ and specially
deals with the chapter on causality in the former book, but . . . _he
takes care not to quote the decisive passage,_ _Mach’s declaration that
there is no physical necessity,_ _but only logical necessity_ ! All that
one can say of such a procedure is that it does not interpret Mach but
adorns him, that it obliterates the differences between “neo-mechanism”
and Machism. Rey’s conclusion is that “Mach adopts the analysis and
conclusions of Hume, Mill and all the phenomenalists, according to whom
the causal relation has no _substantiality_ and is only a habit of
thought. He has also adopted the fundamental thesis of phenomenalism, of
which the doctrine of causality is only a consequence, namely, that
nothing exists save sensations. But he adds, along a purely objectivist
line, that science, analysing sensations, discovers in them certain
permanent and common elements which, although abstracted from these
sensations, have the same reality as the sensations themselves, for they
are taken from sensations by means of perceptual observation. And these
permanent and common elements, such as energy and its various forms, are
the foundation for the systematisation of physics” (p. 117).

This means that Mach accepts Hume’s subjective theory of causality and
interprets it in an objectivist sense! Rey is shirking the issue when he
defends Mach by referring to his inconsistency, and by maintaining that
in the “real” interpretation of experience the latter leads to
“necessity.” Now, experience is what is given to us from without; and if
the necessity of nature and its laws are also given to man from without,
from an objectively real nature, then, of course, all difference between
Machism and materialism vanishes. Rey defends Machism against the charge
of “neo-mechanism” by capitulating to the latter all along the line,
retaining the word phenomenalism but not the essence of that trend.

Poincaré, for instance, fully in the spirit of Mach, derives the laws of
nature—including even the tri-dimensionality of space—from
“convenience.” But this does not at all mean “arbitrary,” Rey hastens to
“correct.” Oh no, “convenient” here expresses “_adaptation to the
object_” (Rey’s italics, p. 196). What a superb differentiation between
the two schools and what a superb “refutation” of materialism! “If
Poincaré’s theory is logically separated by an impassable gulf from the
ontological interpretation of the mechanist school [_i.e._, from the
latter’s acceptance of theory as a copy of the object] . . . if
Poincaré’s theory lends itself to the support of philosophical idealism,
in the scientihc sphere, at least, it agrees very well with the general
evolution of the ideas of classical physics and the tendency to regard
physics as objective knowledge, as objective as experience, that is, as
the sensations from which experience proceeds” (p. 200).

On the one hand, we cannot but admit; on the other hand, it must be
confessed. On the one hand, an impassable gulf divides Poincaré from
neo-mechanism, although Poincaré stands _in between_ Mach’s
“conceptualism” and neo-mechanism, while Mach, it would appear, is not
separated by any gulf from neo-mechanism; on the other hand, Poincaré is
quite compatible with classical physics which, according to Rey himself,
completely accepts the standpoint of “mechanism.” On the one hand,
Poincaré’s theory lends itself to the support of philosophical idealism;
on the other hand, it is compatible with the objective interpretation of
  the word "experience". On the one hand, these bad fideists have
distorted the meaning of the word experience by imperceptible
deviations, by departing from the correct view that “experience is the
object"; on the other hand, the objectivity of experience means only
that experience is sensation . . . with which both Berkeley and Fichte
agree!

Rey got himself muddled because he had set himself the impossible task
of “reconciling” the opposition between the materialist and the idealist
schools in the new physics. He seeks to tone down the materialism of the
neo-mechanist school, attributing to phenomenalism the views of
physicists who regard their theory as a copy of the object.^([1]) And he
seeks to tone down the idealism of the conceptualist school by pruning
away the more emphatic declarations of its adherents and interpreting
the rest in the spirit of shamefaced materialism. How far-fetched and
fictitious is Rey’s disavowal of materialism is shown, for example, by
his opinion of the theoretical significance of the differential
equations of Maxwell and Hertz. In the   opinion of the Machians, the
fact that these physicists limit their theory to a system of equations
refutes materialism: there are equations and nothing else—no matter, no
objective reality, only symbols. Boltzmann refutes this view, fully
aware that he is refuting phenomenalist physics. Rey refutes this view
thinking he is defending phenomenalism! He says: “We could not refuse to
class Maxwell and Hertz among the ‘mechanists’ because they limited
themselves to equations similar to the differential equations of
Lagrange’s dynamics. This does not mean that in the opinion of Maxwell
and Hertz we shall be unable to build a mechanical theory of electricity
out of real elements. Quite the contrary, the fact that we represent
electrical phenomena in a theory the form of which is identical with the
general form of classical mechanics is proof of the possibility . . .”
(p. 253). The indefiniteness of the present solution of the problem
“will diminish in proportion as the _nature_ of the quantities, _i.e.,_
elements, that figure in the equations are more precisely determined.”
The fact that one or another form of material motion has not yet been
investigated is not regarded by Rey as a reason for denying the
materiality of motion. “The homogeneity of matter” (p. 262), not as a
postulate, but as a result of experience and of the development of
science, “the homogeneity of the object of physics"—this is the
condition that makes the application of measurement and mathematical
calculations possible.

Here is Rey’s estimate of the criterion of practice in the theory of
knowledge: “Contrary to the propositions of scepticism, it seems
legitimate to say that the practical value of science is derived from
its theoretical value” (p. 368). Rey prefers not to speak of the fact
that these propositions of scepticism are unequivocally accepted by
Mach, Poincaré and their entire school. “They [the practical value and
theoretical value of science] are the two inseparable and strictly
parallel aspects of its objective value. To say that a law of nature has
practical value . . . is fundamentally the same as saying that this law
of nature has objectivity. To act on the object implies to modify the
object; it implies a reaction on the part of the object that conforms to
the expectation or anticipation contained in the proposition in virtue
of which we acted on the object. Hence, this expectation   or
anticipation contains elements _controlled_ by the object and by the
action it undergoes. . . . In these diverse theories there is thus a
part of objectivity” (p. 368). This is a thoroughly materialist, and
only materialist, theory of knowledge, for other points of view, and
Machism in particular, deny that the criterion of practice has objective
significance, _i.e.,_ significance that does not depend upon man and
mankind.

To sum up, Rey approached the question from an angle entirely different
from that of Ward, Cohen, and Co., but he arrived at the same result,
namely, the recognition that the materialist and idealist trends form
the basis of the division between the two principal schools in modern
physics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] THIS FOOTNOTE has been moved into BODY OF DOCUMENT.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 7. A RUSSIAN 'IDEALIST PHYSICIST'


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Five: The Recent Revolution in Natural Science and Philosophical Idealism )

7. A Russian “Idealist Physicist”

Owing to certain unfortunate conditions under which I am obliged to
work, I have been almost entirely unable to acquaint myself with the
Russian literature of the subject under discussion. I shall confine
myself to an exposition of an article that has an important bearing on
my theme written by our notorious arch-reactionary philosopher, Mr.
Lopatin. The article appeared in the September-October issue of
_Problems of Philosophy and Psychology_,^([1]) 1907, and is entitled “An
Idealist Physicist.” A “true-Russian” philosophical idealist, Mr.
Lopatin bears the same relation to the contemporary European idealists
as, for example, the Union of the Russian People^([2]) does to the
reactionary parties of the West. All the more instructive is it,
therefore, to see how similar philosophical trends manifest themselves
in totally different cultural and social surroundings. Mr. Lopatin’s
article is, as the French say, an _éloge_—a eulogy—of the Russian
physicist, the late N. I. Shishkin (died 1906). Mr. Lopatin was
fascinated by the fact that this cultured man, who was much interested
in Hertz and the new physics generally, was not only a Right-Wing
Constitutional Democrat (p. 339) but a deeply religious man, a devotee
of the philosophy of Vladimir Solovyov, and so on and so forth. However,
in spite of the fact that his main line of “endeavour” lies in the
borderland between philosophy and the police department, Mr. Lopatin has
also furnished certain material for a characterisation of the
_epistemological_ views of   this idealist physicist. Mr. Lopatin
writes: “He was a genuine positivist in his tireless endeavour to give
the broadest possible criticism of the methods of investigation,
suppositions and facts of science from the standpoint of their
suitability as means and material for the construction of an integral
and perfected world outlook. In this respect N. I. Shishkin was the very
antipode of many of his contemporaries. In previous articles of mine in
this periodical, I have frequently endeavoured to explain the
heterogeneous and often shaky materials from which the so-called
scientific world outlook is made up. They include established facts,
more or less bold generalisations, hypotheses that are convenient at the
given moment for one or another field of science, and even auxiliary
scientific fictions. And all this is elevated to the dignity of
incontrovertible objective truths, from the standpoint of which all
other ideas and all other beliefs of a philosophical and religious
nature must be judged, and everything in them that is not indicated in
these truths must be rejected. Our highly talented natural scientist and
thinker, Professor V. I. Vernadsky, has shown with exemplary clarity how
shallow and unfounded are these claims to convert the scientific views
of a given historical period into an immobile, dogmatic system
obligatory for all. And it is not only the broad reading public that is
guilty of making such a conversion [_footnote by Mr. Lopatin_ : “For the
broad public a number of popular books have been written, the purpose of
which is to foster the conviction that there exists such a scientific
catechism providing an answer to all questions. Typical works of this
kind are Büchner’s _Force and Matter_ and Haeckel’s _The Riddle of the
Universe_"] and not only individual scientists in particular branches of
science; what is even more strange is that this sin is frequently
committed by the official philosophers, all of whose efforts are at
times directed only to proving that they are saying nothing but what has
been said before them by representatives of the several sciences, and
that they are only saying it in their own language.

“N. I. Shishkin had no trace of prejudiced dogmatism. He was a convinced
champion of the mechanical explanation of the phenomena of nature, but
for him it was only a method   of investigation . . .” (p. 341). So, so
. . . a familiar refrain! “He was far from believing that the mechanical
theory reveals the true nature of the phenomena investigated; he
regarded it only as the most convenient and fertile method of unifying
and explaining them for the purposes of science. For him, therefore, the
mechanical conception of nature and the materialist view of nature by no
means coincide.” Exactly as in the case of the authors of the _Studies_
“_in” the Philosophy of Marxism_ ! “Quite the contrary, it seemed to him
that in questions of a higher order, the mechanical theory ought to take
a very critical, even a conciliatory attitude.”

In the language of the Machians this is called “overcoming the obsolete,
narrow and one-sided” opposition between materialism and idealism.
“Questions of the first beginning and ultimate end of things, of the
inner nature of our mind, of freedom of the will, the immortality of the
soul and so forth, cannot in their full breadth of meaning come within
its scope—since as a method of investigation it is confined within the
natural limits of its applicability solely to the facts of physical
experience” (p. 342). The last two lines are an undoubted plagiarism
from A. Bogdanov’s _Empirio-momsm._

“Light can be regarded"—wrote Shishkin in his article “Psycho-Physical
Phenomena from the Standpoint of the Mechanical Theory” _(Problems of
Philosophy and Psychology,_ Bk. 1, p. 127)—"as substance, as motion, as
electricity, as sensation.”

There is no doubt that Mr. Lopatin is absolutely right in ranking
Shishkin among the positivists and that this physicist belonged body and
soul to the Machian school of the new physics. In his statement on
light, Shishkin means to say that the various methods of regarding light
are various methods of “organising experience” (in A. Bogdanov’s
terminology), all equally legitimate from different points of view, or
that they are various “connections of elements” (in Mach’s terminology),
and that, in any case, the physicists’ theory of light is not a copy of
objective reality. But Shishkin argues very badly. “Light can be
regarded as substance, as motion. . .” he says. But in nature there is
neither substance without motion nor motion without substance.  
Shishkin’s first “apposition” is meaningless. . . . “As electricity. . .
.” Electricity is a movement of substance, hence Shishkin is wrong here
too. The electromagnetic theory of light has shown that light and
electricity are forms of motion of one and the same substance (ether).
“As sensation. . . .” Sensation is an image of matter in motion. Save
through sensations, we can know nothing either of the forms of substance
or of the forms of motion; sensations are evoked by the action of matter
in motion upon our sense-organs. That is how science views it. The
sensation of red reflects ether vibrations of a frequency of
approximately 450 trillions per second. The sensation of blue reflects
ether vibrations of a frequency of approximately 620 trillions per
second. The vibrations of the ether exist independently of our
sensations of light. Our sensations of light depend on the action of the
vibrations of the ether on the human organ of vision. Our sensations
reflect objective reality, _i.e.,_ some thing that exists independently
of humanity and of human sensations. That is how science views it.
Shishkin’s argument against materialism is the cheapest kind of
sophistry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] Voprosy Filosofii i Psikhologii (Problems of Philosophy and
Psychology)—a journa1 of an idealist tendency, founded by Professor N.
Y. Grot, published in Moscow from November 1889 to April 1918 (from 1894
it, was published by the Moscow Psychological Society). It contained
articles on philosophy, psychology, logic, ethics, aesthetics, critical
notes and analyses of theories and works   of West-European philosophers
and psychologists, reviews of books on philosophy and of foreign
philosophical journals, and other material. In the nineties its
contributors included the “legal Marxists” P. B. Struve and S. N.
Bulgakov, and in the years of reaction—A. Bogdanov and other Machists.
From 1894 it was edited by L. M. Lopatin.

[2] Union of the Russian People—an ultra-reactionary, Black-Hundred
organisation of the monarchists, formed in October 1905 in St.
Petersburg for combating the revolutionary movement. The Union united
reactionary landlords, big house owners, merchants, police officials,
clergy, urban petty-bourgeoisie, kulaks, and declassed and criminal
elements. It was headed by V. A. Bobrinsky, A. I. Dubrovin, P. A.
Krushevan, N. E. Markov 2nd, V. M. Purish kevich and others. Its press
organs were the newspapers _Russkoye Znamya (Russian Flag), Obyedineniye
(Union),_ and _Groza (Storm)._ Branches of the Union were opened in many
Russian towns.

The Union defended the continuance of the tsarist autocracy, the
preservation of semi-feudal landlordism and the privileges of the
nobility. Its motto was the monarchist, nationalist slogan of the feudal
epoch—“orthodox religion, autocracy, nationhood”. It chose pogroms and
murder as its chief weapon against the revolution. Helped and protected
by the police, its members openly and with impunity beat up and murdered
leading revolutionary workers and representatives of the democratic
intelligentsia, disrupted and fired on meetings, organised anti-Jewish
pogroms and viciously persecuted non-Russian nationalities.

After the dissolution of the Second Duma, the Union split into two
organisations: the “Chamber of the Archangel Michael” headed by
Purishkevich, which advocated using the Third Duma for
counter-revolutionary aims, and the Union of the Russian People proper,
headed by Dubrovin, which continued the tactics of open terrorism. Both
of the Black-Hundred organisations were abolised during the February
bourgeois-democratic revolution of 1917. After the October Socialist
Revolution, former members of these organisations took an active part in
counter-revolutionary revolts and conspiracies against the Soviet power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 8. THE ESSENCE AND SIGNIFICANCE OF 'PHYSICAL' IDEALISM


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Five: The Recent Revolution in Natural Science and Philosophical Idealism )

8. The Essence and Significance of “Physical” Idealism

We have seen that the question of the epistemological deductions that
can be drawn from the new physics has been raised and is being discussed
from the most varied points of view in English, German and French
literature. There can be no doubt that we have before us a certain
international ideological current, which is not dependent upon any one
philosophical system, but which is the result of certain general causes
Iying outside the sphere of philosophy. The foregoing review of the
facts undoubtedly shows that Machism is “connected” with the new
physics, but at the same time reveals that the version of this
connection spread by our Machians is _fundamentally incorrect_. As in
philosophy, so in physics, our Machians slavishly follow the _fashion,_
and are unable from their own, Marxist, standpoint to give a general
survey of particular currents and to judge the place they occupy.

A double falsity pervades all the talk about Mach’s philosophy being
“the philosophy of twentieth-century natural science,” “the recent
philosophy of the sciences,” “recent natural-scientific positivism” and
so forth. (Bogdanov in the introduction to _Analysis of Sensations,_ pp.
iv, xii; _cf_. also Yushkevich, Valentinov and Co.) Firstly, Machism is
ideologically connected with only _one_ school in _one_ branch of modern
science. Secondly, and this is the main point, what in Machism is
connected with this school _is not what distinguishes it from all other
trends and systems of idealist philosophy,_ _but what it has in common
with philosophical idealism in general_. It suffices to cast a glance at
the ideological current in question _as a whole_ in order to leave no
shadow of doubt as to the truth of this statement. Take the physicists
of this school: the German Mach, the Frenchman Henri Poincaré, the
Belgian P. Duhem, the Englishman Karl Pearson. They have much in common:
they have the same basis and are following the same direction, as each
of them rightly acknowledges. But what they have in common includes
neither the doctrine of empirio-criticism in general, nor Mach’s
doctrine, say, of the “world-elements” in particular. The three latter
physicists even know nothing of either of these doctrines. They have
“only” one thing in common—philosophical idealism, towards which they
all, without exception, _tend_ more or less consciously, more or less
decisively. Take the philosophers who base themselves on _this school_
of the new physics, who try to ground it epistemologically and to
develop it, and you will again find the German immanentists, the
disciples of Mach, the French neo-criticists and idealists, the English
spiritualists, the Russian Lopatin and, in addition, the one and only
empirio-monist, A. Bogdanov. They all have only one thing in common,
namely, that they all—more or less consciously, more or less decisively,
either with an abrupt and precipitate slant towards fideism, or with a
personal aversion to it (as in Bogdanov’s case)—are vehicles of
philosophical idealism.

The fundamental idea of the school of the new physics under discussion
is the denial of the objective reality given us in our sensation and
reflected in our theories, of the doubt as to the existence of such a
reality. Here this school departs from _materialism_ (inaccurately
called realism, neo-mechanism,   hylo-kinetism, and not in any
appreciable degree consciously developed by the physicists), which by
_general acknowledgment_ prevails among the physicists—and departs from
it as a school of “physical” idealism.

To explain this last term, which sounds very strange, it is necessary to
recall an episode in the history of modern philosophy and modern
science. In 1866 L. Feuerbach attacked Johannes Müller, the famous
founder of modern physiology, and ranked him with the “physiological
idealists” _(Werke,_ Vol. X, p. 197). The idealism of this physiologist
consisted in the fact that when investigating the significance of the
mechanism of our sense-organs in relation to sensations, showing, for
instance, that the sensation of light is produced as the result of the
action of various stimuli on the eye, he was inclined to arrive from
this at a denial that our sensations are images of objective reality.
This tendency of one school of scientists towards “physiological
idealism,” _i.e.,_ towards an idealist interpretation of certain data of
physiology, was very accurately discerned by L. Feuerbach. The
“connection” between physiology and philosophical idealism, chiefly of
the Kantian kind, was for a long time after that exploited by
reactionary philosophy. F. A. Lange made great play of physiology in
support of Kantian idealism and in refutation of materialism; while
among the immanentists (whom Bogdanov so incorrectly places midway
between Mach and Kant), J. Rehmke in 1882 specially campaigned against
the allegation that Kantianism was con firmed by physiology.^([1]) That
a number of eminent physiologists at that time _gravitated_ towards
idealism and Kantianism is as indisputable as that today a number of
eminent physicists _gravitate_ towards philosophical idealism.
“Physical” idealism, _i.e.,_ the idealism of a certain school of
physicists at the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the
twentieth century, no more “refutes” materialism, no more establishes
the connection between idealism (or empirio-criticism) and natural
science, than did the similar efforts of F. A. Lange and the
“physiological” idealists. The deviation   towards reactionary
philosophy manifested in both cases by one school of scientists in one
branch of science is a temporary deflection, a transitory period of
sickness in the history of science, an ailment of growth, mainly brought
on by the _abrupt breakdown_ of old established concepts.

The connection between modern “physical” idealism and the crisis of
modern physics is, as we have already pointed out, generally
acknowledged. “The arguments of sceptical criticism levelled against
modern physics"—writes A. Rey, who is referring not so much to the
sceptics as to the outspoken adherents of fideism, like
Brunetiere—"essentially amount to the proverbial argument of all
sceptics: a diversity of opinions” (among the physicists). But this
diversity “proves nothing against the objectivity of physics.” “In the
history of physics, as in history generally, one can distinguish great
periods which differ by the form and general aspect of theories. . . .
But as soon as a discovery is made that affects all fields of physics
because it establishes some cardinal fact hitherto badly or very
partially perceived, the entire aspect of physics is modified; a new
period sets in. This is what occurred after Newton’s discoveries, and
after the discoveries of Joule-Mayer and Carnot-Clausius. The same
thing, apparently, is taking place since the discovery of radioactivity.
. . . The historian who later sees things from the necessary distance
has no trouble in discerning a steady evolution where contemporaries saw
conflicts, contradictions, and divisions into various schools.
Apparently, the crisis which physics has undergone in recent years
(despite the conclusions drawn from it by philosophical criticism) is no
different. It even excellently illustrates the typical crisis of growth
_(crise de croissance)_ occasioned by the great modern discoveries. The
undeniable transformation of physics which will result (could there be
evolution or progress without it?) will not perceptibly alter the
scientific spirit” (op. cit., pp. 370-72).

Rey the conciliator tries to unite all schools of modern physics against
fideisml This is a falsity, well meant, but a falsity nevertheless; for
the trend of the school of Mach-Poincaré-Pearson towards idealism
_(i.e.,_ refined fideism)   is beyond dispute. And the objectivity of
physics that is associated with the basis of the “scientific spirit,” as
distinct from the fideist spirit, and that Rey defends so ardently, is
nothing but a “shamefaced” formulation of materialism. The basic
materialist spirit of physics, as of all modern science, will overcome
all crises, but only by the indispensable replacement of metaphysical
materialism by dialectical materialism.

Rey the conciliator very often tries to gloss over the fact that the
crisis in modern physics consists in the latter’s deviation from a
direct, resolute and irrevocable recognition of the objective value of
its theories. But facts are stronger than all attempts at
reconciliation. The mathematicians, writes Rey, “in dealing with a
science, the subject matter of which, apparently at least, is created by
the mind of the scientist, and in which, at any rate, concrete phenomena
are not involved in the investigation, have formed too abstract a
conception of the science of physics. Attempts have been made to bring
it ever closer to mathematics, and the general conception of mathematics
has been transferred to the conception of physics. . . . This is an
invasion of the mathematical spirit into the methods of judging and
understanding physics that is denounced by all the experimenters. And is
it not to this influence, none the less powerful because at times
concealed, that are often due the uncertainty, the wavering of mind
regarding the objectivity of physics, and the detours made or the
obstacles surmounted in order to demonstrate it? . . .” (p. 227).

This is excellently said. “Wavering of mind” as to the objectivity of
physics—this is the very essence of fashionable “physical” idealism.

“. . . The abstract fictions of mathematics seem to have interposed a
screen between physical reality and the manner in which the
mathematicians understand the science of this reality. They vaguely feel
the objectivity of physics. . . . Although they desire above all to be
objective when they engage in physics; although they seek to find and
retain a foothold in reality, they are still haunted by old habits. So
that even in the concepts of energetics, which had to be built more
solidly and with fewer hypotheses than the   old mechanism—which sought
to copy _(décalquer)_ the sensible universe and not to reconstruct it—we
are still dealing with the theories of the mathematicians. . . . They
[the mathematicians] have done everything to save objectivity, for they
are aware that without objectivity there can be no physics. . . . But
the complexity or deviousness of their theories nevertheless leaves an
uneasy feeling. It is too artificial, too far-fetched, too stilted
_(édifié)_; the experimenter here does not feel the spontaneous
confidence which constant contact with physical reality gives him. . . .
This in effect is what is said by all physicists who are primarily
physicists or who are exclusively physicists—and their name is legion;
this is what is said by the entire neo-mechanist school. . . . The
crisis in physics lies in the conquest of the realm of physics by the
mathematical spirit. The progress of physics on the one hand, and the
progress of mathematics on the other, led in the nineteenth century to a
close amalgamation between these two sciences. . . . Theoretical physics
has become mathematical physics. . . . Then there began the formal
period, that is to say, the period of mathematical physics, purely
mathematical; mathematical physics not as a branch of physics so to
speak, but as a branch of mathematics cultivated by the mathematicians.
Along this new line the mathematician, accustomed to conceptual (purely
logical) elements, which furnish the sole subject matter of his work,
and feeling himself cramped by crude, material elements, which he found
insufficiently pliable, necessarily always tended to reduce them to
abstractions as far as possible, to present them in an entirely
non-material and conceptual manner, or even to ignore them altogether.
The elements, as real, objective data, as _physical_ elements, so to
speak, completely disappeared. There remained only formal relations
represented by the differential equations. . . . If the mathematician is
not the dupe of his constructive work, when he analyses theoretical
physics . . . he can recover its ties with experience and its objective
value, but at a first glance, and to the uninitiated person, we seem
faced with an arbitrary development. . . . The concept, the notion, has
everywhere replaced the real element. . . . Thus, historically, by
virtue of the mathematical form assumed by theoretical physics, is
explained . . . the ailment (_le malaise_), the   crisis of physics, and
its apparent withdrawal from objective facts” (pp. 228-32).

Such is the first cause of “physical” idealism. The reactionary attempts
are engendered by the very progress of science. The great successes
achieved by natural science, the approach to elements of matter so
homogeneous and simple that their laws of motion can be treated
mathematically, encouraged the mathematicians to overlook matter.
“Matter disappears,” only equations remain. In the new stage of
development and apparently in a new manner, we get the old Kantian idea:
reason prescribes laws to nature. Hermann Cohen, who, as we have seen,
rejoices over the idealist spirit of the new physics, goes so far as to
advocate the introduction of higher mathematics in the schools—in order
to imbue high-school students with the spirit of idealism, which is
being extinguished in our materialistic age (F. A. Lange, _Geschichte
des Materialismus,_ 5. Auflage, 1896, Bd. II, S. xlix). This, of course,
is the ridiculous dream of a reactionary and, in fact, there is and can
be nothing here but a temporary infatuation with idealism on the part of
a small number of specialists. But what is highly characteristic is the
way the drowning man clutches at a straw, the subtle means whereby
representatives of the educated bourgeoisie artificially attempt to
preserve, or to find a place for, the fideism which is engendered among
the masses of the people by their ignorance and their downtrodden
condition, and by the wild absurdities of capitalist contradictions.

Another cause which bred “physical” idealism is the principle of
_relativism,_ the relativity of our knowledge, a principle which, in a
period of breakdown of the old theories, is taking a firm hold upon the
physicists, and which, _if the latter are ignorant of dialectics,_ is
bound to lead to idealism.

The question of the relation between relativism and dialectics plays
perhaps the most important part in explaining the theoretical
misadventures of Machism. Take Rey, for instance, who like all European
positivists has no conception whatever of Marxist dialectics. He employs
the word dialectics exclusively in the sense of idealist philosophical
speculation. As a result, although he feels that the new physics has
gone astray on the question of   relativism, he nevertheless flounders
helplessly and attempts to differentiate between moderate and immoderate
relativism. Of course, “immoderate relativism logically, if not in
practice, borders on actual scepticism” (p. 215), but there is no
“immoderate” relativism, you see, in Poincaré. Just fancy, one can, like
an apothecary, weigh out a little more or a little less relativism and
thus save Machism!

As a matter of fact, the only theoretically correct formulation of the
question of relativism is given in the dialectical materialism of Marx
and Engels, and ignorance of it is bound to lead from relativism to
philosophical idealism. Incidentally, the failure to understand this
fact is enough to render Mr. Berman’s absurd book, _Dialectics in the
Light of the Modern Theory of Knowledge,_ utterly valueless. Mr. Berman
repeats the old, old nonsense about dialectics, which he has entirely
failed to understand. We have already seen that in the theory of
knowledge _all_ the Machians, _at every step,_ reveal a similar lack of
understanding.

All the old truths of physics, including those which were regarded as
firmly established and incontestable, have proven to be relative
truths—_hence,_ there can be no objective truth independent of mankind.
Such is the argument not only of all the Machians, but of the “physical”
idealists in general. That absolute truth results from the sum-total of
relative truths in the course of their development; that relative truths
represent relatively faithful reflections of an object existing
independently of man; that these reflections become more and more
faithful; that every scientific truth, notwithstanding its relative
nature, contains an element of absolute truth—all these propositions,
which are obvious to anyone who has thought over Engels’ _Anti-Dühring,_
are for the “modern” theory of knowledge a book with seven seals.

Such works as Duhem’s _Theory of Physics,_^([2]) or Stallo’s,^([3])
which Mach particularly recommends, show very clearly that these
“physical” idealists attach the most significance   to the proof of the
relativity of our knowledge, and that they are in reality vacillating
between idealism and dialectical materialism. Both authors, who belong
to different periods, and who approach the question from different
angles (Duhem’s speciality is physics, in which field he has worked for
twenty years; Stallo was an erstwhile orthodox Hegelian who grew ashamed
of his own book on natural philosophy, written in 1848 in the old
Hegelian spirit), energetically combat the atomistic-mechanical
conception of nature. They point to the narrowness of this conception,
to the impossibility of accepting it as the limit of our knowledge, to
the petrification of many of the ideas of writers who hold this
conception. And it is indeed undeniable that the _old_ materialism did
suffer from such a defect; Engels reproached the earlier materialists
for their failure to appreciate the relativity of all scientific
theories, for their ignorance of dialectics and for their exaggeration
of the mechanical point of view. But Engels (unlike Stallo) was able to
discard Hegelian idealism and _to grasp_ the great and true kernel of
Hegelian dialectics. Engels rejected the old metaphysical materialism
for _dialectical_ materialism, and not for relativism that sinks into
subjectivism. “The mechanical theory,” says Stallo, for instance, “in
common with all metaphysical theories, hypostases partial, ideal, and,
it may be, purely conventional groups of attributes, or single
attributes, and treats them as varieties of objective reality” (p. 150).
This is quite true, if you do not deny objective reality and combat
metaphysics for being anti-dialectical. Stallo does not realise this
clearly. He has not understood materialist dialectics and therefore
frequently slips, by way of relativism, into subjectivism and idealism.

The same is true of Duhem. With an enormous expenditure of labour, and
with the help of a number of interesting and valuable examples from the
history of physics, such as one frequently encounters in Mach, he shows
that “every law of physics is provisional and relative, because it is
approximate” (p. 280). The man is hammering at an open door!—will be the
thought of the Marxist when he reads the lengthy disquisitions on this
subject. But that is just the trouble with Duhem, Stallo, Mach and
Poincaré, that they do not perceive the door opened by dialectical
materialism.   Being unable to give a correct formulation of relativism,
they slide from the latter into idealism. “A law of physics, properly
speaking, is neither true nor false, but approximate"—writes Duhem
(p. 274). And this “but” contains the beginning of the falsity, the
beginning of the obliteration of the boundary between a scientific
theory that approximately _reflects the object,_ _i.e.,_ approaches
objective truth, and an arbitrary, fantastic, or purely conventional
theory, such as, for example, a religious theory or the theory of the
game of chess.

Duhem carries this falsity to the point of declaring that the question
whether “material reality” corresponds to per ceptual phenomena is
_metaphysics_ (p. 10). Away with the question of reality! Our concepts
and hypotheses are mere signs (p. 26), “arbitrary” (p. 27)
constructions, and so forth. There is only one step from this to
idealism, to the “physics of the believer,” which M. Pierre Duhem
preaches in the Kantian spirit (Rey, p. 162; cf., p. 160). But the good
Adler (Fritz)—also a Machian would-be Marxist!—could find nothing
cleverer to do than to “correct” Duhem as follows: Duhem, he claims,
eliminates the “realities concealed behind phenomena only as objects of
theory, but not as _objects of reality_.”^([4]) This is the familiar
criticism of Kantianism from the standpoint of Hume and Berkeley.

But, of course, there can be no question of any conscious Kantianism on
the part of Duhem. He is merely _vacillating_ as is Mach, not knowing on
what to base his relativism. In many passages he comes very close to
dialectical materialism. He says that we know sound “such as it is in
relation to us but not as it is in itself, in the sound-producing
bodies. This reality, of which our sensations give us only the external
and the veil, is made known to us by the theories of acoustics. They
tell us that where our perceptions register only this appearance which
we call sound, there really exists a very small and very rapid periodic
movement,” etc. (p. 7). Bodies are not symbols of sensations, but
sensations are symbols (or rather, images) of bodies. “The development
of physics gives rise to a constant struggle between nature, which  
does not tire of offering new material, and reason, which does not tire
of cognising” (p. 32). Nature is infinite, just as its smallest particle
(including the electron) is infinite, but reason just as infinitely
transforms “things-in-themselves” into “things-for-us.” “Thus, the
struggle between reality and the laws of physics will continue
indefinitely; to every law that physics may formulate, reality will
sooner or later oppose a rude refutation in the form of a fact; but,
indefatigable, physics will improve, modify, and complicate the refuted
law” (p. 290). This would be a quite correct exposition of dialectical
materialism if the author firmly held to the existence of this objective
reality independent of humanity. “. . . The theory of physics is not a
purely artificial system which is convenient today and unsuitable
tomorrow . . . it is a classification, which becomes more and more
natural, a reflection, which grows clearer and clearer, of the realities
that the experimental method cannot contemplate face to face” (p. 445).

In this last phrase the Machian Duhem flirts with Kantian idealism: it
is as if the way is being opened for a method other than the
“experimental” one, and as if we cannot know the “things-in-themselves”
directly, immediately, face to face. But if the theory of physics
becomes more and more natural, that means that “nature,” reality,
“reflected” by this theory, exists independently of our
consciousness—and that is precisely the view of dialectical materialism.

In a word, the “physical” idealism of today, just as the “physiological”
idealism of yesterday, merely means that one school of natural
scientists in one branch of natural science has slid into a reactionary
philosophy, being unable to rise directly and at once from metaphysical
materialism to dialectical materialism.^([5]) This step is being   made,
and will be made, by modern physics; but it is making for the only true
method and the only true philosophy of natural science not directly, but
by zigzags, not consciously but instinctively, not clearly perceiving
its “final goal,” but drawing closer to it gropingly, hesitatingly, and
sometimes even with its back turned to it. Modern physics is in travail;
it is giving birth to dialectical materialism. The process of
child-birth is painful. And in addition to a living healthy being, there
are bound to be produced certain dead products, refuse fit only for the
garbage-heap. And the entire school of physical idealism, the entire
empirio-critical philosophy, together with empirio-symbolism,
empirio-monism, and so on, and so forth, must be regarded as such
refuse!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

Notes

[1] Johannes Rehmke, _Philosophie und Kantianismus [Philosophy and
Kantianism],_ Eisenach, 1882, S. 15, _et seq_. —_Lenin_

[2] P. Duhern, _La théorie physique,_ _son objet et sa structure,_
Paris, 1906. —_Lenin_

[3] J. B. Stallo. _The Concepts and Theories of Modern Physics,_ London,
1882, There are French and German translations. —_Lenin_

[4] Translator’s note to the German translation of Duhem, Leipzig, 1908,
J. Barth. —_Lenin_

[5] The famous chemist, William Ramsay, says: “I have been frequently
asked: ‘But is not electricity a vibration? How can wireless telegraphy
be explained by the passage of little particles or corpuscles?’ The
answer is: ‘Electricity is a _thing_ ; it _is_ (Ramsay’s italics) these
minute corpuscles, but when they leave an object, a wave, like a wave of
light, spreads through the ether, and this wave is used for wireless
telegraphy’” (William Ramsay, _Essays,_ _Biographical and Chemical,_
London, 1908, p. 126). Having spoken about the transformation of radium
into helium, Ramsay remarks: “At least one so-called element can no
longer be regarded as ultimate matter, but is itself undergoing   change
into a simpler form of matter” (p. 160). “Now it is almost certain that
negative electricity is a particular form of matter; and positive
electricity is matter deprived of negative electricity—that is, minus
this electric matter” (p. 176). “Now what is electricity? It used to be
believed, formerly, that there were two kinds of electricity, one called
positive and the other negative. At that time it would not have been
possible to answer the question. But recent researches make it probable
that what used to be called negativc electricity is really a substance.
Indeed, the relative weight of its particles has been measured; each is
about one seven hundredth of the mass of an atom of hydrogen. . . .
Atoms of electricity are named ‘electrons’” (p. 196). If our Machians
who write books and articles on philosophical subjects were capable of
thinking, they would understand that the expression “matter disappears,”
“matter is reduced to electricity,” etc., is only an epistemologically
helpless expression of the truth that science is able to discover new
forms of matter, new forms of material motion, to reduce the old forms
to the new forms, and so on. —_Lenin_

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 1. THE EXCURSIONS OF THE GERMAN EMPIRIO-CRITICISTS INTO THE FIELD OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

Chapter Six: Empirio-Criticism and Historical Materialism

The Russian Machians, as we have already seen, are divided into two
camps. Mr. V. Chernov and the collaborators of the _Russkoye
Bogatstvo_^([3]) are downright and consistent opponents of dialectical
materialism, both in philosophy and history. The other company of
Machians, in whom we are more interested here, are would-be Marxists and
try in every way to assure their readers that Machism is compatible with
the historical materialism of Marx and Engels. True, these assurances
are for the most part nothing but assurances; not a single Machian
would-be Marxist has ever made the slightest attempt to present in any
systematic way the real trends of the founders of empirio-criticism in
the field of the social sciences. We shall dwell briefly on this
question, turning first to the statements to be found in writings of the
German empirio-criticists and then to those of their Russian disciples.

( Chapter Five: The Recent Revolution in Natural Science and Philosophical Idealism )

1. The Excursions of the German Empirio-Criticists Into The Field of the Social Sciences

In 1895, when R. Avenarius was still alive, there appeared in the
philosophical journal edited by him an article by his disciple, F. Blei,
entitled “Metaphysics in Political Economy.”^([1]) All the teachers of
empirio-criticism wage war   on the “metaphysics” not only of explicit
and conscious philosophical materialism, but also of natural science,
which instinctively adopts the standpoint of the materialist theory of
knowledge. The disciple takes up arms against metaphysics in political
economy. The fight is directed against the most varied schools of
political economy, but we are interested only in the character of the
empirio-critical argument against the school of Marx and Engels.

“The purpose of the present investigation,” writes Franz Blei, “is to
show that all political economy until now, in its endeavour to interpret
the phenomena of economic life, operates with metaphysical premises;
that it . . . ‘derives’ the ‘laws’ governing an economy from the
‘nature’ of the latter, and man is only an incidental factor in relation
to these ‘laws.’ . . . In all its theories political economy has
hitherto rested on metaphysical grounds; all its theories are
unbiological, and therefore unscientific and worthless for knowledge. .
. . The theoreticians do not know what they are building their theories
on, what the soil is of which these theories are the fruit. They regard
themselves as realists operating without any premises whatever, for they
are, forsooth, dealing with ‘sober’ _(nüchterne),_ ‘practical’ and
‘tangible’ _(sinnfällige)_ economic phenomena. . . . And all have that
family resemblance to many trends in physiology which only the same
parents—_viz_., metaphysics and speculation—can transmit to their
children, in our case to the physiologists and economists. One school of
economists analyses the ‘phenomena’ of ‘economy’ [Avenarius and his
school put ordinary words in quotation marks in order to show that they,
the true philosophers, discern the essentially “metaphysical character”
of a use of words which is so vulgar and so unrefined by
“epistemological analysis”] without placing what they find _(das
Gefundene)_ in this way into relation with the behaviour of individuals;
the physiologists exclude the behaviour of the individual from their
investigations as being ‘actions of the soul’ _(Wirkungen der Seele),_
while the economists of this trend declare the behaviour of individuals
to be negligible in relation to the ‘immanent laws of economy’ (pp.
378–79). With Marx, theory established ‘economic laws’ from construed
processes, and these ‘laws’ figured in the initial section
_(Initialabschnitt)_ of   the dependent vital series, while the economic
processes figured in the final section _(Finalabschnitt)_. . . .
‘Economy’ was transformed by the economists into a transcendental
category, in which they discovered such ‘laws’ as they wished to
discover: the ‘laws’ of ‘capital’ and ‘labour,’ ‘rent,’ ‘wages’ and
‘profit.’ The economists transformed man into a Platonic
idea—‘capitalist,’ ‘worker,’ etc. Socialism ascribed to the ‘capitalist’
the character of being ‘greedy for profit,’ liberalism ascribed to the
worker the character of being ‘exacting’—and both characters were
moreover explained by the ‘operation of the laws of capital’” (pp.
381-82).

“Marx came to the study of French socialism and political economy with a
socialist world outlook, and his aim as regards knowledge was to provide
a ‘theoretical foundation’ for his world outlook in order to ‘safeguard’
his initial value. He found the law of value in Ricardo . . . but the
conclusion which the French Socialists had drawn from Ricardo could not
satisfy Marx in his endeavour to ‘safeguard’ his E-value— brought into a
vital-difference, _i.e.,_ his ‘world outlook,’ for these conclusions had
already entered as a component part into the content of his initial
value in the form of ‘indignation at the robbery of the workers,’ and so
forth. The conclusions were rejected as ‘being formally untrue
economically’ for they are ‘simply an application of morality to
political economy.’ ‘But what formally may be economically incorrect,
may all the same be correct from the point of view of world history. If
the moral consciousness of the mass declares an economic fact to be
unjust, that is a proof that the fact itself has been outlived, that
other economic facts have made their appearance, owing to which the
former one has become unbearable and untenable. Therefore, a very true
economic content may be concealed behind the formal economic
incorrectness.’” (From Engels’ preface to Karl Marx’s _The Poverty of
Philosophy_.)

Having quoted the above passage from Engels, Blei continues: “In the
above quotation the middle section _(Medial abschnitt)_ of the dependent
series which interests us here is detached [_abgehoben_—a technical term
of Avenarius’ implying: reached the consciousness, separated off]. After
the ‘cognition’ that an ‘economic fact’ must be concealed   behind the
‘moral consciousness of injustice,’ comes the final section
[_Finalabschnitt_: the theory of Marx is a statement, _i.e.,_ an
E-value, _i.e.,_ a vital-difference which passes through three stages,
three sections, initial, middle and final: _Initialabschnitt,_
_Medialabschnitt,_ _Finalabschnitt]_ . . . _i.e.,_ the ‘cognition’ of
that ‘economic fact.’ Or, in other words, the task now is to ‘find
again’ the initial value, his ‘world out look,’ in the ‘economic facts’
in order to ‘safeguard’ the initial value. This definite variation of
the dependent series already contains the Marxist metaphysics,
regardless of how the ‘cognised’ appears in the final section
_(Finalabschnitt)_. ‘The socialist world outlook,’ as an independent
E-value, ‘absolute truth,’ is ‘given a basis’ ‘retrospectively’ by means
of a ‘special’ theory of knowledge, namely, the economic system of Marx
and the materialist theory of history. . . . By means of the concept of
surplus value the ‘subjective’ ‘truth,’ in the Marxist world outlook
finds its ‘objective truth,’ in the theory of knowledge of the ‘economic
categories’—the safeguarding of the initial value is completed and
metaphysics has retrospectively received its critique of knowledge” (pp.
384-86).

The reader is probably fuming at us for quoting at such length this
incredibly trivial rigmarole, this quasi-scientific tomfoolery decked
out in the terminology of Avenarius. But _wer den Feind will verstehen,
muss im Feindes Lande gehen_—who would know the enemy must go into the
_enemy’s_ territory.^([4]) And R. Avenarius’ philosophical journal is
indeed enemy territory for Marxists. And we invite the reader to
restrain for a minute his legitimate aversion for the buffoons of
bourgeois science and to analyse the argument of Avenarius’ disciple and
collaborator.

Argument number one: Marx is a “metaphysician” who did not grasp the
epistemological “critique of concepts,” who did not work out a general
theory of knowledge and who simply inserted materialism into his
“special theory of knowledge.”

This argument contains nothing original to Blei personally. We have
already seen scores and hundreds of times that _all_ the founders of
empirio-criticism and _all_ the Russian Machians accuse materialism of
“metaphysics,” or,   more accurately, they repeat the hackneyed
arguments of the Kantians, Humeans and idealists against materialist
“metaphysics.”

Argument number two: Marxism is as “metaphysical” as natural science
(physiology). And here again it is not Blei who is “responsible” for
this argument, but Mach and Avenarius; for it was they who declared war
on “natural-historical metaphysics,” applying that name to the
instinctively materialist theory of knowledge to which (on their own
admission and according to the judgment of all who are in any way versed
in the subject) the vast majority of scientists adhere.

Argument number three: Marxism declares that “personality” is a
_quantité négligeable,_ a cypher, that man is an “incidental factor,”
subject to certain “immanent laws of economics,” that an analysis _des
Gefundenen,_ _i.e.,_ of what is found, of what is given, etc., is
lacking. This argument is a _complete_ repetition of the stock of ideas
of the empirio-critical “principal co-ordination,” _i.e.,_ of the
_idealist_ crotchet in Avenarius’ theory. Blei is absolutely right when
he says that it is impossible to find the slightest hint of such
idealist nonsense in Marx and Engels, and that from the standpoint of
this nonsense Marxism must be rejected _completely,_ from the very
beginning, from its fundamental philosophical premises

Argument number four: Marx’s theory is “unbiological,” it is entirely
innocent of “vital-differences” and of similar spurious biological terms
which constitute the “science” of the reactionary professor, Avenarius.
Blei’s argument is correct from the standpoint of Machism, for the gulf
between Marx’s theory and Avenarius’ “biological” spillikins is indeed
obvious at once. We shall presently see how the Russian Machian would-be
Marxists in effect followed in Blei’s footsteps.

Argument number five: the partisanship, the partiality of Marx’s theory
and his preconceived solution. The empirio-criticists _as a whole,_ and
not Blei alone, claim to be non-partisan both in philosophy and in
social science. They are neither for socialism nor for liberalism. They
make no differentiation between the fundamental   and irreconcilable
trends of materialism and idealism in philosophy, but endeavour to _rise
above_ them. We have traced this tendency of Machism through a long
series of problems of epistemology, and we ought not to be surprised
when we encounter it in sociology.

“Argument” number six: ridiculing “objective” truth. Blei at once
sensed, and rightly sensed, that historical materialism and Marx’s
entire economic doctrine are permeated through and through by a
recognition of objective truth. And Blei accurately expressed the
tendency of Mach’s and Avenarius’ doctrines, when, precisely because of
the idea of objective truth, he, “from the very threshold,” so to speak,
rejected Marxism by at once declaring that there was absolutely nothing
behind the Marxist teaching save the “subjective” views of Marx.

And if our Machians renounce Blei (as they surely will), we shall tell
them: You must not blame the mirror for showing a crooked face. Blei is
a mirror which _accurately_ reflects the tendencies of
empirio-criticism, and a renouncement by our Machians would only bear
witness to their good intentions—and to their absurd eclectical
endeavours to combine Marx and Avenarius.

Let us pass from Blei to Petzoldt. If the former is a mere disciple, the
latter is declared by outstanding empirio-criticists, such as Lessevich,
to be a master. While Blei brings up the question of Marxism explicitly,
Petzoldt—who would not demean himself by dealing with a mere Marx or a
mere Engels—sets forth in positive form the views of empirio-criticism
on sociology, which enables us to compare them with Marxism.

The second volume of Petzoldt’s _Einführung in die Philosophie der
reinen Erfahrung_ is entitled “_Auf dem Wege zum Dauernden_” (“Towards
Stability”). The author makes the tendency towards stability the basis
of his investigation. “The main features of the ultimate _(endgültige)_
state of stability of humanity can be inferred in its formal aspect. We
thus arrive at the foundations of ethics, aesthetics and the formal
theory of knowledge” (p. iii). “Human development bears its goal within
itself, it also tends towards a perfect _(vollkommene)_ state of
stability” (p. 60). The signs of this are abundant and varied. For
instance, are there   many violent radicals who do not in their old age
become “more sensible,” more restrained? True, this “premature
stability” (p. 62) is characteristic of the philistine. But do not
philistines constitute the “compact majority”? (p. 62.)

Our philosopher’s conclusion, which he gives in italics, is this: “The
quintessential feature of all the aims of our reasoning and creative
activity is stability” (p. 72). The explanation is: “Many cannot bear to
see a key Iying obliquely on the table, still less a picture hanging
crooked on the wall. . . . And such people are not necessarily pedants.
. . . It is only that they have _a feeling that something is not in
order_” (p. 72, Petzoldt’s italics). In a word, the “tendency to
stability is a striving for an extreme, by its nature ultimate, state”
(p. 73). All this is taken from the fifth chapter of Volume II entitled
“_Die psychische Tendenz zur Stabilität_” (“The Psychical Tendency to
Stability”). The proofs of this tendency are all very weighty. For
instance: “A striving for an extreme, a highest, in the original spatial
sense, is pursued by the majority of mountain climbers. It is not always
the desire for a spacious view or joy in the physical exercise of
climbing in fresh air and wide nature that urges them towards the peaks,
but also the instinct which is deeply ingrained in every organic being
to pursue an adopted path of activity until a natural aim has been
achieved” (p. 73). Another example: the amount of money people will pay
to secure a complete collection of postage stamps! “It makes one’s head
swim to examine the price list of a dealer in postage stamps. . . . And
yet nothing is more natural and comprehensible than this urge for
stability” (p. 74).

The philosophically untutored can have no conception of the breadth of
the principles of stability and of economy of thought. Petzoldt develops
his “theory” in detail for the profane. “Sympathy is an expression of
the immediate need for a state of stability,” runs § 28. “Sympathy is
not a repetition, a duplication of the observed suffering, but suffering
on account of this suffering. . . . The greatest emphasis must be placed
on the immediacy of sympathy. If we admit this we thereby admit that the
welfare of others can concern a man just as immediately and
fundamentally as his own welfare, and we thus at the same time reject
every utilitarian and eudemonistic foundation of ethics. Thanks to   its
longing for stability and peace, human nature is not fundamentally evil,
but anxious to help. . . .

“The immediacy of sympathy is frequently manifested in the immediacy of
help. The rescuer will often fling himself without thought to save a
drowning man. He cannot bear the sight of a person struggling with
death; he forgets his other duties and risks his own life and the life
of his near ones in order to save the useless life of some degraded
drunkard; in other words, under certain circumstances sympathy can drive
one to actions that are morally unjustifiable.”

And scores and hundreds of pages of empirio-critical philosophy are
filled with such unutterable platitudes!

Morality is deduced from the concept “moral state of stability” (The
second section of Volume II: “_Die Dauerbestande der Seele_” [“Stable
States of the Soul”], Chapter I, “_Vom ethischen Dauerbestande_” [“On
Ethical Stable States”]). “The state of stability, according to the very
concept of it, contains no conditions of change in any of its
components. From this it at once follows that it can contain no
possibility of _war_” (p. 202). “Economic and social equality is implied
in the conception of the final _(endgultig),_ stable state” (p. 213).
This “state of stability” is derived not from religion but from
“science.” The “majority” cannot bring it about, as the socialists
suppose, nor can the power of the socialists “help humanity” (p. 207).
Oh, no!—it is “free development” that will lead to the ideal. Are not,
indeed, the profits of capital decreasing and are not wages constantly
increasing? (p. 223). All the assertions about “wage slavery” are untrue
(p. 229). A slave’s leg could be broken with impunity—but now? No,
“moral progress” is beyond doubt; look at the university settlements in
England, at the Salvation Army (p. 230), at the German “ethical
societies.” In the name of “aesthetic stability” (Chapter II, Section 2)
“romanticism” is rejected. But romanticism embraces all forms of
inordinate extension of the ego, idealism, metaphysics, occultism,
solipsism, egoism, the “forcible coercion of the minority by the
majority” and the “social-democratic ideal of the organisation of all
labour by the state” (pp. 240-41).^([2])

The sociological excursions of Blei, Petzoldt and Mach are but an
expression of the infinite stupidity of the philistine, smugly retailing
the most hackneyed rubbish under cover of a new “empirio-critical”
systematisation and terminology. A pretentious cloak of verbal
artifices, clumsy devices in syllogistic, subtle scholasticism, in a
word, as in epistemology, so in sociology—the same reactionary content
under the same flamboyant signboard.

Let us now turn to the Russian Machians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] Vierteljahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie, 1895, Bd.
XIX, F. Blei, “_Die Metaphysik in der Nationalökonomie,_” S. 378-90.
—_Lenin_

[2] It is in the same spirit that Mach expresses himself in favour of
the bureaucratic socialism of Popper and Menger, which guarantees the
“freedom of the individual,” whereas, he opines, the doctrine of the
Social-Democrats, which “compares unfavourably” with this socialism,
threatens a “slavery even more universal and more oppressive than that
of a monarchical or oligarchical state.” See _Erkenntnis und Irrtum,_ 2.
Auflage, 1906, S. 80-81. —_Lenin_

[3] _Russkoye Bogatstvo (Russian Wealth)_—a monthly magazine published
in St. Petersburg from 1876 to 1918. From the beginning of the nineties
it passed into the hands of the liberal Narodniks headed by N. K.
Mikhailovsky. Grouped round the magazine were publicists who
subsequently became prominent members of the Socialist-Revolutionary
Party, the Party of “Popular Socialists” and the Trudovik groups in the
State Duma. In 1906 it became the organ of the semi-Cadet Trudovik
Popular Socialist Party.

[4] These words are an adaptation of a couplet by Goethe, taken by Lenin
from I. S. Turgenev’s novel _Virgin Soil._

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 2. HOW BOGDANOV CORRECTS AND 'DEVELOPS' MARX


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Six: Empirio-Criticism and Historical Materialism )

2. How Bogdanov Corrects and “Develops” Marx

In his article “The Development of Life in Nature and Society” _(From
the Psychology of Society,_ 1902, p. 35, _et seq_.), Bogdanov quotes the
well-known passage from the preface to _Zur Kritik_,^([1]): where the
“great sociologist”, i.e., Marx, expounds the basis of historical
materialism. Having quoted Marx’s words, Bogdanov declares that the “old
formulation of historical monism, without ceasing to be basically true,
no longer fully satisfies us” (37). The author wishes, therefore, to
correct the theory, or to develop it, _starting from the basis of the
theory itself_. The author’s chief conclusion is as follows:

“We have shown that social forms belong to the comprehensive
_genus_—biological adaptations. But we have not thereby defined the
province of social forms; for a definition, not only the _genus,_ but
also the _species_ must be established. . . . In their struggle for
existence men can unite only with the help of _consciousness_ : without
consciousness there can be no intercourse. Hence, _social life in all
its manifestations is a consciously psychical life_. . . . Society is
inseparable from consciousness. _Social being and social consciousness
are,_ _in the exact meaning of these terms, identical_” (pp. 50, 51,
Bogdanov’s italics).

That this conclusion is absolutely alien to Marxism has been pointed out
by Orthodox _(Philosophical Essays,_   St. Petersburg, 1906, p. 183,
ff.). But Bogdanov responded simply by abuse, picking upon an _error_ in
quotation: instead of “in the exact meaning of these terms,” Orthodox
had quoted “in the full meaning of these terms.” This error was indeed
committed, and the author had every right to correct it; but to raise a
cry of “mutilation,” “substitution,” and so forth _(Empirio-Monism,_ Bk.
III, p. xliv), is simply to _obscure_ the essence of the point at issue
by wretched words. What ever “exact” meaning Bogdanov may have invented
for the terms “social being” and “social consciousness,” there can be no
doubt that the statement we have quoted is not _correct_. “Social being”
and “social consciousness” are not identical, just as being in general
and consciousness in general are not identical. From the fact that in
their intercoutse men act as conscious beings, it _does not follow_ that
social consciousness is identical with social being. In all social
formations of any complexity—and in the capitalist social formation in
particular—people in their intercourse are _not conscious_ of what kind
of social relations are being formed, in accordance with what laws they
develop, etc. For instance, a peasant when he sells his grain enters
into “intercourse” with the world producers of grain in the world
market, but he is not conscious of it; nor is he conscious of the kind
of social relations that are formed on the basis of exchange. Social
consciousness _reflects_ social being—that is Marx’s teaching. A
reflection may be an approximately true copy of the reflected, but to
speak of identity is absurd. Consciousness in general _reflects_
being—that is a general principle of _all_ materialism. It is impossible
not to see its direct and _inseparable_ connection with the principle of
historical materialism: social consciousness _reflects_ social being.

Bogdanov’s attempt imperceptibly to correct and develop Marx in the
“spirit of his principles” is an obvious distortion of these
_materialist_ principles in the spirit of _idealism_. It would be
ludicrous to deny it. Let us recall Bazarov’s exposition of
empirio-criticism (not empirio-monism, oh no!—there is such a wide, wide
difference between these “systems”!): “sense-perception _is_ the reality
existing outside us.” This is plain idealism, a plain theory of the
identity of consciousness and being. Recall, further, the formulation of
W. Schuppe,   the immanentist (who swore and vowed as fervently as
Bazarov and Co. that he was not an idealist, and who with no less vigour
than Bogdanov insisted on the very “exact” meaning of his terms): “being
is consciousness.” Now compare this with the _refutation_ of Marx’s
historical materialism by the immanentist Schubert-Soldern: “Every
material process of production is always an act of consciousness on the
part of its observer. . . . In its epistemological aspect, it is not the
external process of production that is the _primary (prius),_ but the
subject or subjects; in other words, even the purely material process of
production does not lead us out of the general connection of
consciousness _(Bewusstseinszusammenhang)_.” (See _Das menschliche Glück
und die soziale Frage,_ S. 293, 295-96.)

Bogdanov may curse the materialists as much as he pleases for
“mutilating his thoughts,” but no curses will alter the simple and plain
fact. The correction of Marx’s theory and the development of Marx
supposedly in the spirit of Marx by the “empirio-monist” Bogdanov _in no
essential respect_ differ from the way the idealist and epistemological
solipsist Schubert-Soldern endeavours to refute Marx. Bogdanov assures
us that he is not an idealist. Schubert-Soldern assures us that he is a
realist (Bazarov even believed him). In our time a philosopher has to
declare himself a “realist” and an “enemy of idealism.” It is about time
you understood this, Messrs. Machians!

The immanentists, the empirio-criticists and the empirio-monists all
argue over particulars, over details, over the formulation of
_idealism,_ whereas we _from the very outset_ reject all the principles
of their philosophy common to this trinity. Let Bogdanov, accepting in
the best sense and with the best of intentions _all the conclusions_ of
Marx, preach the “identity” of social being and social consciousness; we
shall say: Bogdanov _minus_ “empirio-monism” (or rather, _minus_
Machism) is a Marxist. For this theory of the identity of social being
and social consciousness is _sheer nonsense_ and an _absolutely
reactionary_ theory. If certain people reconcile it with Marxism, with
Marxist behaviour, we must admit that these people are better than their
theory, but we cannot justify outrageous theoretical distortions of
Marxism.

Bogdanov reconciles his theory with Marx’s conclusions, and sacrifices
elementary consistency for the sake of these conclusions. Every
individual producer in the world economic system realises that he is
introducing a certain change into the technique of production; every
owner realises that he exchanges certain products for others; but these
producers and these owners do not realise that in doing so they are
thereby changing _social being_. The sum-total of these changes in all
their ramifications in the capitalist world economy could not be grasped
even by seventy Marxes. The paramount thing is that the _laws_ of these
changes have been discovered, that the _objective_ logic of these
changes and their historical development have at bottom and in the main
been disclosed—objective, not in the sense that a society of conscious
beings, men, could exist and develop independently of the existence of
conscious beings (and it is only such trifles that Bogdanov _stresses_
by his “theory”), but in the sense that social being is _independent_ of
_the social consciousness_ of men. The fact that you live and conduct
your business, beget children, produce products and exchange them, gives
rise to an objectively necessary chain of events, a chain of
development, which is independent of your _social_ consciousness, and is
never grasped by the latter completely. The highest task of humanity is
to comprehend this objective logic of economic evolution (the evolution
of social life) in its general and fundamental features, so that it may
be possible to adapt _to it_ one’s social consciousness and the
consciousness of the advanced classes of all capitalist countries in as
definite, clear and critical a fashion as possible.

Bogdanov admits all this. And what does this mean? It means _in effect_
that his theory of the “identity of social being and social
consciousness” is thrown overboard, that it becomes an empty scholastic
appendage, as empty, dead and useless as the “theory of general
substitution” or the doctrine of “elements,” “introjection” and the rest
of the Machian rigmarole. But the “dead lay hold of the living”; the
dead scholastic appendage, _against the will of and independently of the
consciousness_ of Bogdanov, converts his philosophy into a _serviceable
tool_ of the Schubert-Solderns and other reactionaries, who in a
thousand different keys,   from a hundred professorial chairs,
disseminate _this_ dead thing as a living thing, direct it against the
living thing, for the purpose of stifling it. Bogdanov personally is a
sworn enemy of reaction in general and of bourgeois reaction in
particular. Bogdanov’s “substitution” and theory of the “identity of
social being and social consciousness” _serve_ this reaction. It is sad,
but true.

Materialism in general recognises objectively real being (matter) as
independent of consciousness, sensation, experience, etc., of humanity.
Historical materialism recognises social being as independent of the
social consciousness of humanity. In both cases consciousness is only
the reflection of being, at best an approximately true (adequate,
perfectly exact) reflection of it. From this Marxist philosophy, which
is cast from a single piece of steel, you cannot eliminate one basic
premise, one essential part, without departing from objective truth,
without falling a prey to a bourgeois-reactionary falsehood.

Here are further examples of how the dead philosophy of idealism lays
hold of the living Marxist Bogdanov.

The article “What Is Idealism?” 1901 _(ibid_., p. 11 _et seq_.): “We
arrive at the following conclusion: both where people agree in their
judgments of progress and where they disagree, the basic meaning of the
idea of progress is the same, namely, _increasing completeness and
harmony of conscious life_. This is the objective content of the concept
progress. . . . If we now compare the psychological formulation of the
idea of progress thus arrived at with the previously explained
biological formulation [“biological _progress is_ an _increase in the
sum-total of life,_” p. 14], we shall easily convince ourselves that the
former fully coincides with the latter and can be deduced from it. . . .
And since social life amounts to the psychical life of members of
society, here too the content of the idea of progress is the
same—increase in the completeness and harmony of life; only we must add:
the _social_ life of men. And, of course, the idea of social progress
never had and cannot have any other content” (p. 16).

“We have found . . . that idealism expresses the victory in the human
soul of moods more social over moods less social, that a progressive
ideal is a reflection of the socially progressive tendency in the
idealist psychology” (p. 32).

It need hardly be said that all this play with biology and sociology
contains _not a grain_ of Marxism. Both in Spencer and Mikhailovsky one
may find any number of definitions not a whit worse than this, defining
nothing but the “good intentions” of the author and betraying a
_complete lack of understanding_ of “what is idealism” and what
materialism.

The author begins Book III of _Empirio-Monism,_ the article “Social
Selection (Foundations of Method),” 1906, by refuting the “eclectic
socio-biological attempts of Lange, Ferri, Woltmann and many others”
(p. 1), and on page 15 we find the following conclusion of the
“enquiry”: “We can formulate the fundamental connection between
energetics and social selection as follows:

“_Every act of social selection represents an increase or decrease of
the energy of the social complex concerned. In the former case we have
‘positive selection,’ in the latter ‘negative selection_.’” (Author’s
italics.)

And such unutterable trash is served out as Marxism! Can one imagine
anything more sterile, lifeless and scholastic than this string of
biological and energeticist terms that contribute nothing, and can
contribute nothing, in the sphere of the social sciences? There is not a
shadow of concrete economic enquiry here, not a hint of the Marxist
_method,_ the method of dialectics and the world outlook of materialism,
only a mere _invention_ of definitions and attempts to fit them into the
ready-made conclusions of Marxism. “The rapid growth of the productive
forces of capitalist society is undoubtedly an increase in the energy of
the social whole. . . .” The second half of the phrase is undoubtedly a
simple repetition of the first half expressed in meaningless terms which
seem to lend “profundity” to the question, but which in reality _in no
way_ differ from the eclectic biologico-sociological attempts of Lange
and Co.!—“but the disharmonious character of this process leads to its
culmination in a crisis, in a vast waste of productive forces, in a
sharp decrease of energy: positive selection is replaced by negative
selection” (p. 18).

In what way does this differ from Lange? A biologico-energeticist label
is tacked on to ready-made conclusions on the subject of crises, without
any concrete material whatever being added and without the nature of
crises being elucidated.   All this is done with the very best
intentions, for the author wishes to corroborate and give greater depth
to Marx’s conclusions; but in point of fact he only _dilutes_ them with
an intolerably dreary and lifeless scholasticism. The only “Marxism”
here is a _repetition_ of an already known conclusion, and all the “new”
proof of it, all this “_social energetics_” (p. 34) and “social
selection” is but a mere _collection of words_ and a sheer mockery of
Marxism.

Bogdanov is not engaged in a Marxist enquiry at all; all he is doing is
to reclothe results already obtained by the Marxist enquiry in a
biological and energeticist terminology. The whole attempt is worthless
from beginning to end, for the concepts “selection,” “assimilation and
dissimilation” of energy, the energetic balance, and so forth, are, when
applied to the sphere of the social sciences, but _empty phrases_. In
fact, an _enquiry_ into social phenomena and an elucidation of the
_method_ of the social sciences _cannot_ be undertaken with the aid of
these concepts. Nothing is easier than to tack the labels of
“energetics” or “biologico-sociology” on to such phenomena as crises,
revolutions, the class struggle and so forth; but neither is there
anything more sterile, more scholastic and lifeless than such an
occupation. The important thing is not that Bogdanov tries to fit _all_
his results and conclusions into the Marxist theory—or “nearly” all (we
have seen the “correction” he made on the subject of the relation of
social being to social consciousness)—but that the _methods_ of
fitting—this “social energetics”—are thoroughly false and in no way
differ from the methods of Lange.

“Herr Lange _(On the Labour Question,_ etc., 2nd ed.),” Marx wrote to
Kugelmann on June 27, 1870, “sings my praises loudly, but with the
object of making himself im portant. Herr Lange, you see, has made a
great discovery. The whole of history can be brought under a single
great natural law. This natural law is the _phrase_ (in this application
Darwin’s expression becomes nothing but a phrase) ‘struggle for life,’
and the content of this phrase is the Malthusian law of population or,
rather, over-population. So, instead of analysing the ‘struggle for
life’ as represented historically in various definite forms of society,
all that has to be done is to translate every concrete struggle into the
  phrase ‘struggle for life,’ and this phrase itself into the Malthusian
‘population fantasy.’ One must admit that this is a very impressive
method—for swaggering, sham-scientific, bombastic ignorance and
intellectual laziness.”[2]

The basis of Marx’s criticism of Lange is not that Lange foists
Malthusianism in particular upon sociology, but that the transfer of
biological concepts in _general_ to the sphere of the social sciences is
_phrasemongering_. Whether the transfer is undertaken with “good”
intentions, or with the purpose of bolstering up false sociological
conclusions, the phrase mongering none the less remains phrasemongering.
And Bogdanov’s “social energetics,” his coupling of the doctrine of
social selection with Marxism, is just such phrasemongering.

Just as in epistemology Mach and Avenarius did not develop idealism, but
only overlaid the _old_ idealist errors with a bombastic terminological
rigmarolc (“elements,” “principal co-ordination,” “introjection,” etc.),
so in sociology, even when there is sincere sympathy for Marxist
conclusions, empirio-criticism results in a distortion of historical
materialism by means of empty and bombastic energeticist and biological
verbiage.

A historical peculiarity of modern Russian Machism (or rather of the
Machian epidemic among a section of the Social-Democrats) is the
following. Feuerbach was a “materialist below and an idealist above”;
this to a certain extent applies also to Büchner, Vogt, Moleschott and
Dühring, with the essential difference that all these philosophers were
pygmies and wretched bunglers compared with Feuerbach.

Marx and Engels, as they grew out of Feuerbach and matured in the fight
against the bunglers, naturally paid most attention to crowning the
structure of philosophical materialism, that is, not to the materialist
epistemology but to the materialist conception of history. That is why
Marx and Engels laid the emphasis in their works rather on _dialectical
materialism_ than on dialectical _materialism,_ why they insisted rather
on _historical_ materialism than on historical _materialism_. Our
would-be Marxist Machians approached Marxism in an entirely different
historical period, at a time when bourgeois philosophers were
particularly specialising in epistemology, and, having assimilated in a
  one-sided and mutilated form certain of the component parts of
dialectics (relativism, for instance), directed their attention chiefly
to a defence or restoration of idealism below and not of idealism above.
At any rate, positivism in general, and Machism in particular, have been
much more concerned with subtly falsifying epistemology, assuming the
guise of materialism and concealing their idealism under a
pseudo-materialist terminology, and have paid comparatively little
attention to the philosophy of history. Our Machians did not understand
Marxism because they happened to approach it _from the other side,_ so
to speak, and they have assimilated—and at times not so much assimilated
as learnt by rote—Marx’s economic and historical theory, without clearly
apprehending its foundation, _viz_., philosophical materialism. And the
result is that Bogdanov and Co. deserve to be called Russian Büchners
and Dührings turned inside out. They want to be materialists above, but
are unable to rid themselves of muddled idealism below! In the case of
Bogdanov, “above” there is historical materialism, vulgarised, it is
true, and much corrupted by idealism, “below” there is idealism,
disguised in Marxist terminology and decked out in Marxist words.
“Socially organised experience,” “collective labour process,” and so
forth are Marxist words, but they are _only words,_ concealing an
idealist philosophy that declares things to be complexes of “elements,”
of sensations, the external world to be “experience,” or an
“empirio-symbol” of mankind, physical nature to be a “product” of the
“psychical,” and so on and so forth.

An ever subtler falsification of Marxism, an ever subtler presentation
of anti-materialist doctrines under the guise of Marxism—this is the
characteristic feature of modern revisionism in political economy, in
questions of tactics and in philosophy generally, both in epistemology
and in sociology.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] This refers to the Preface to Marx’s work Zur Kritik der politischen
Ökonomie(Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy).

[2] See K. Marx and F. Engels, _Selected Correspondence,_ Moscow, 1955,
p. 290.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 3. SUVOROV'S 'FOUNDATIONS OF SOCIAL PHILOSOPHY'


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Six: Empirio-Criticism and Historical Materialism )

3. Suvorov’s “Foundations Of Social Philosophy”

The _Studies_ “_in” the Philosophy of Marxism,_ the concluding article
in which is the one by Comrade S. Suvorov mentioned above, by very
reason of the collective nature of the book   constitutes an unusually
potent bouquet. When you have at one time and side by side the
utterances of Bazarov,[2] who says that according to Engels
“sense-perception is the reality existing outside us,” of Berman, who
declares the dialectics of Marx and Engels to be mysticism, of
Lunacharsky, who goes to the length of religion, of Yushkevich, who
introduces “the Logos into the irrational stream of experience,” of
Bogdanov, who calls idealism the philosophy of Marxism, of Helfond, who
purges J. Dietzgen of materialism, and lastly, of S. Suvorov with his
article “Foundations of Social Philosophy”—you at once get the “aroma”
of the new alignment. Quantity has passed into quality. The “seekers,”
who had heretofore been seeking separately in individual articles and
books, have come out with a veritable pronunciamento. Individual
disagreements among them are obliterated by the very fact of their
collective appearance _against_ (and not “in”) the philosophy of
Marxism, and the reactionary features of Machism as a current become
manifest.

Under these circumstances, Suvorov’s article is all the more interesting
for the fact that the author is neither an empirio-monist nor an
empirio-criticist, but simply a “realist.” What relates him, therefore,
to the rest of the company is not what distinguishes Bazarov, Yushkevich
and Bogdanov as philosophers, but what they all have in common _against_
dialectical materialism. A comparison of the sociological arguments of
this “realist” with the arguments of the empirio-monist will help us to
depict their _common_ tendency.

Suvorov writes: “In the gradation of the laws that regulate the world
process, the particular and complex become reduced to the general and
simple, and all of them are subordinate to the universal law of
development—_the law of the economy of forces_. The essence of this law
is that _every system of forces is the more capable of conservation and
development the less its expenditure,_ _the greater its accumulation and
the more effectively expenditure serves_ _accumulation_. The forms of
mobile equilibrium, which long ago evoked the idea of objective
expediency (the solar system, the cycle of terrestrial phenomena, the
process of life), arise and develop by virtue of the conservation   and
accumulation of the energy inherent in them—by virtue of their intrinsic
economy. The law of economy of forces is the unifying and regulating
principle of all development—inorganic, biological and social” (p. 293,
author’s italics).

With what remarkable ease do our “positivists” and “realists” turn out
“universal laws”! What a pity these laws are no whit better than those
turned out as easily and swiftly by Eugen Dühring. Suvorov’s “universal
law” is just as empty and bombastic a phrase as Dühring’s universal
laws. Try to apply this law to the first of the three fields mentioned
by the author—inorganic development. You will see that no “economy of
forces” apart from the law of the conservation and transformation of
energy can be applied here, let alone applied “universally.” And the
author had already disposed of the law of the “conservation of energy,”
had already mentioned it (p. 292) as a separate law.^([1]) What then
remained in the field of inorganic development apart from this law?
Where are the additions or complications, or new discoveries, or new
facts which entitled the author to modify (“perfect”) the law of the
conservation and transformation of energy into the law of the “_economy
of forces_”? There are no such facts or discoveries; Suvorov does not
even hint at them. He simply—to make it look impressive, as Turgenev’s
Bazarov— used to say—flourished his pen and forth came a new “universal
  law” of “real-monistic philosophy” (p. 292). That’s the stuff we are
made of! How are we worse than Dühring?

Take the second field of development—the biological. In this field,
where the development of organisms takes place by the struggle for
existence and selection, is it the law of the economy of forces or the
“law” of the wastage of forces that is universal? But never mind!
“Real-monistic philosophy” can interpret the “_meaning_” of a universal
law in one field in one way and in another field in another way, for
instance, as the development of _higher_ organisms from lower. What does
it matter if the universal law is thus transformed into an empty
phrase—the principle of “monism” is preserved. And in the third field
(the social), the “universal law” can be interpreted in a third sense—as
the development of productive forces. That is why it is a “universal
law”—so that it can be made to cover anything you please.

“Although social science is still young, it already possesses both a
solid foundation and definite generalisations; in the nineteenth century
it reached a theoretical level—and this constitutes Marx’s chief merit.
He elevated social science to the level of a social theory Engels said
that Marx transformed socialism from a utopia into a science, but this
is not enough for Suvorov. It will sound more impressive if we
_distinguish theory from science_ (was there a social science before
Marx?)—and no harm is done if the distinction is absurd!.

“ . . . by establishing the fundamental law of social dynamics according
to which the evolution of productive forces is the determining principle
of all economic and social development. But the development of
productive forces corresponds to the growth of the productivity of
labour, to the relative reduction in expenditure and the increase in the
accumulation of energy [see how fertile the “real-monistic philosophy”
is: a new, energeticist, foundation for Marxism has been created!]...
this is the economic principle. Thus, Marx made the principle of the
economy of forces the foundation of the social theory. . . .”

This “thus” is truly superb! _Because_ Marx has a political economy, let
us _therefore_ chew the _word_ “economy,” and call the cud
“real-monistic philosophy”!

No, Marx did not make any principle of the economy of forces the basis
of his theory. These are absurdities invented by people who covet the
laurels of Eugen Dühring. Marx gave an absolutely precise definition of
the concept growth of productive forces, and he studied the concrete
process of this growth. But Suvorov invented a new term to designate the
concept analysed by Marx; and his invention was a very unhappy one and
only confused matters. For Suvorov did not explain what is meant by the
“economy of forces,” how it can be measured, how this concept can be
applied, precise and definite facts it embraces;—and this cannot be
explained, because it is a muddle. Listen to this:

“ . . . This law of social economy is not only the principle of the
internal unity of social science [can you make anything of this,
reader?], but also the connecting link between social theory and the
general theory of being” (p. 294).

Well, well, here we have “the general theory of being” once more
discovered by S. Suvorov, after it has already been discovered many
times and in the most varied forms by numerous representatives of
scholastic philosophy. We congratulate the Russian Machians on this new
“general theory of being”! Let us hope that their next collective work
will be entirely devoted to the demonstration and development of this
great discovery!

The way our representative of realistic, or real-monistic, philosophy
expounds Marx’s theory will be seen from the following example: “In
general, the productive forces of men form a genetic gradation [ugh!]
and consist of their labour energy, harnessed elemental forces,
culturally modihed nature and the instruments of labour which make up
the technique of production. . . . In relation to the process of labour
these forces perform a purely economic function; they economise labour
energy and increase the productivity of its expenditure” (p. 298).
Productive forces perform an economic function in relation to the
process of labour! This is just as though one were to say that vital
forces perform a vital function in relation to the process of life. This
is not expounding Marx; this is clogging up Marxism with an incredible
clutter of words.

It is impossible to enumerate all the clutter contained in Suvorov’s
article. “The socialisation of a class is expressed in the growth of its
collective power over both people and their property” (p. 313). “ . . .
The class struggle aims at establishing forms of equilibrium between
social forces” (p. 322). Social dissension, enmity and struggle are
essentially negative, anti-social phenomena. “Social progress, in its
basic content, is the growth of social relations, of the social
connections between people” (p. 328). One could fill volumes with
collections of such banalities—and the representatives of bourgeois
sociology are filling volumes with them. But to pass them off as the
philosophy of Marxism—that is going too far! If Suvorov’s article were
an experiment in popularising Marxism, one would not judge it very
severely. Everyone would admit that the author’s intentions were of the
best but that the experiment was unsuccessful. And that would be the end
of it. But when a group of Machians present us with such stuff and call
it the _Foundations of Social Philosophy,_ and when we see the same
methods of “developing” Marxism employed in Bogdanov’s philosophical
books, we arrive at the inevitable conclusion that there is an intimate
connection between reactionary epistemology and reactionary efforts in
sociology.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] THIS FOOTNOTE has been moved into BODY OF DOCUMENT.

[2] _Bazarov, V. (Rudnev, V. A.),_ 1874-1939—philosopher and economist.
From 1896 onwards took part in the Social-Democratic movement. In
1905-07 collaborated on several Bolshevik publications. In the period of
reaction (1907-10) drew away from Bolshevism; advocated “god-building”
and empirlo-criticism; was one of the leading representatives of the
Machist revision of Marxism.

[3] The discovery of the law of the conservation and transformation of
energy, led up to by the whole development of natural science,
especially contributed to by the work of Lomonosov, occurred in the
forties of the nineteenth century (the works of Robert Mayer, James
Joule and Hermann Helmholtz). The word energy in its modern sense was
introduced in 1853 by William Rankin, but it only came into general use
in the seventies and eighties. Most physicists were at first critical of
the new law, but its correctness was speedily proved in all spheres of
natural science. Bagels considered this law one of the most important
achievements of the nineteenth century and he looked on it as a
universal law of nature expressing in the language of physics the unity
of the material world. “The unity of all motion in nature,” he wrote,
“is no longer a philosophical assertion, but a natural scientific fact”
_(Dialectic of Nature,_ p. 264).

Some scientists cast doubt on the universal nature of the law of the
conservation and transformation of energy and tried to interpret it in
an idealist spirit. Thus, Mach refused to regard it as a universal law
of nature and considered that it amounted merely to an acknowledgement
of the causal dependence of phenomena. Wilhelm Ostwalff regarded it as
the sole universal law of nature and he tried to deny the objective
reality of matter, to discard the concept of matter and to prove that
energy exists without matter, reducing all phenomena of nature, society
and thought to energy. A. Bogdanov tried to depict social changes as an
increase or decrease of energy.

Lenin criticised “energeticism” as one of the manifestations of
“physical idealism” and he showed the untenability in principle of
attempts to transfer the laws of natural science to social phenomena.
The further development of science, and study of the phenomena of the
micro-world, confirmed the universal character of the law of the
conservation and transformation of energy; the relativity theory
established the universal relationship between energy and mass.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 4. PARTIES IN PHILOSOPHY AND PHILOSOPHICAL BLOCKHEADS


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Six: Empirio-Criticism and Historical Materialism )

4. Parties in Philosophy and Philosophical Blockheads

It remains for us to examine the relation between Machism and religion.
But this broadens into the question of whether there are parties
generally in philosophy, and what is meant by non-partisanship in
philosophy.

Throughout the preceding exposition, in connection with every problem of
epistemology touched upon and in connection with every philosophical
question raised by the new physics, we traced the struggle between
_materialism_ and _idealism_. Behind the mass of new terminological
devices, behind the litter of erudite scholasticism, we invariably
discerned _two_ principal alignments, two fundamental trends in the
solution of philosophical problems. Whether nature, matter, the
physical, the external world should be taken as primary, and
consciousness, mind,   sensation (experience—as the _widespread_
terminology of our time has it), the psychical, etc., should be regarded
as secondary—that is the root question which _in fact_ continues to
divide the philosophers into _two great camps_. The source of thousands
upon thousands of errors and of the confusion reigning in this sphere is
the fact that beneath the envelope of terms, definitions, scholastic
devices and verbal artihces, these two fundamental trends are
_overlooked_. (Bogdanov, for instance, refuses to acknowledge his
idealism, because, you see, instead of the “metaphysical” concepts
“nature” and “mind,” he has taken the “experiential”: physical and
psychical. A word has been changed!)

The genius of Marx and Engels consisted in the very fact that in the
course of a long period, _nearly half a century,_ they developed
materialism, that they further advanced one fundamental trend in
philosophy, that they did not stop at reiterating epistemological
problems that had already been solved, but consistently applied—and
showed _how_ to apply—_this same_ materialism in the sphere of the
social sciences, mercilessly brushing aside as litter and rubbish the
pretentious rigmarole, the innumerable attempts to “discover” a “new”
line in philosophy, to invent a “new” trend and so forth. The verbal
nature of such attempts, the scholastic play with new philosophical
“isms,” the clogging of the issue by pretentious devices, the inability
to comprehend and clearly present the struggle between the two
fundamental epistemological trends—this is what Marx and Engels
persistently pursued and fought against throughout their entire
activity.

We said, “nearly half a century.” And, indeed, as far back as 1843, when
Marx was only becoming Marx, _i.e.,_ the founder of scientific
socialism, the founder of _modern materialism,_ which is immeasurably
richer in content and in comparably more consistent than all preceding
forms of materialism, even at that time Marx pointed out with amazing
clarity the basic trends in philosophy. Karl Grün quotes a letter from
Marx to Feuerbach dated October 20, 1843,^([8]) in which Marx invites
Feuerbach to write an article for the _Deutsch-Französische
Jahrbücher_^([9]) against Schelling. This Schelling, writes Marx, is a
shallow braggart with his claims to having embraced and transcended  
all previous philosophical trends. “To the French romanticists and
mystics he [Schelling] says: I am the union of philosophy and theology;
to the French materialists: I am the union of the flesh and the idea; to
the French sceptics: I am the destroyer of dogmatism.”[1] That the
“sceptics,” be they called Humeans or Kantians (or, in the twentieth
century, Machians), cry out against the “dogmatism” of both materialism
and idealism, Marx at that time already realised; and, without letting
himself be diverted by any one of a thousand wretched little
philosophical systems, he was able through Feuerbach to take the direct
materialist road as against idealism. Thirty years later, in the
afterword to the second edition of the first volume of _Capital,_ Marx
just as clearly and definitely contrasted _his materialism_ to Hegel’s
_idealism,_ the most consistent and developed idealism of all; he
contemptuously brushed Comtean “positivism” aside and dubbed as wretched
epigoni the contemporary philosophers who imagined that they had
destroyed Hegel when in reality they had reverted to a repetition of the
pre-Hegelian errors of Kant and Hume.^([10]) In the letter to Kugelmann
of June 27, 1870, Marx refers just as contemptuously to “Büchner, Lange,
Dühring, Fechner, etc.,” because they understood nothing of Hegel’s
dialectics and treated him with scorn.^([2]) And finally, take the
various philosophical utterances by Marx in _Capital_ and other works,
and you will find an _invariable_ basic motif, _viz_., insistence upon
materialism and contemptuous derision of all obscurity, of all confusion
and all deviations towards _idealism_. _All_ Marx’s philosophical
utterances revolve within these two fundamental opposites, and, in the
eyes of professorial philosophy, their defect lies in this “narrowness”
and “one-sidedness.” As a matter of fact, this refusal to recognise the
hybrid projests for reconciling materialism and idealism   constitutes
the great merit of Marx, who moved _forward_ along a sharply-dehned
philosophical road.

Entirely in the spirit of Marx, and in close collaboration with him,
Engels in all his philosophical works briefly and clearly contrasts the
materialist and idealist lines in regard to _all_ questions, without,
either in 1878, or 1888, or 1892,^([11]) taking seriously the endless
attempts to “transcend” “one-sidedness” of materialism and idealism, to
proclaim a _new_ trend—“positivism,” “realism,” or some other
professorial charlatanism. Engels based his _whole_ fight against
Dühring on the demand for consistent adherence to materialism, accusing
the materialist Dühring of verbally confusing the issue, of
phrasemongering, of methods of reasoning which involved a compromise
with idealism and adoption of the position of idealism. Either
materialism consistent to the end, or the falsehood and confusion of
philosophical idealism—such is the formulation of the question given in
_every paragraph_ of _Anti-Dühring_ ; and only people whose minds had
already been corrupted by reactionary professorial philosophy could fail
to notice it. And right down to 1894, when the last preface was written
to _Anti-Dühring,_ revised and enlarged by the author for the last time,
Engels continued to follow the latest developments both in philosophy
and science, and continued with all his former resoluteness to hold to
his lucid and firm position, brushing away the litter of new systems,
big and little.

That Engels followed the new developments in philosophy is evident from
_Ludwig Feuerbach_. In the 1888 preface, mention is even made of such a
phenomenon as the rebirth of classical German philosophy in England and
Scandinavia, whereas Engels (both in the preface and in the text of the
book) has nothing but the most extreme contempt for the prevailing
Neo-Kantianism and Humism. It is quite obvious that Engels, observing
the repetition by _fashionable_ German and English philosophy of the old
pre-Hegelian errors of Kantianism and Humism, was prepared to expect
some good even _from the turn to Hegel_ (in England and Scandinavia),
hoping that the great idealist and dialectician would help to disclose
petty idealist and metaphysical errors.^([12])

Without undertaking an examination of the vast number of shades of
Neo-Kantianism in Germany and of Humism in England, Engels _from the
very outset_ refutes their fundamental deviation from materialism.
Engels declares that the _entire tendency_ of these two schools is
“_scientifically a step backward_.” And what is his opinion of the
undoubtedly “positivist,” according to the current terminology, the
undoubtedly “realist” tendencies of these Neo-Kantians and Humeans,
among whose number, for instance, he could not help knowing Huxley? That
“positivism” and that “realism” which attracted, and which continue to
attract, an infinite number of muddleheads, Engels declared to be _atb e
s ta philistine method of smuggling in materialism_ while abusing and
abjuring it publicly! One has to reflect only very little on _such_ an
appraisal of Thomas Huxley—a very great scientist and an incomparably
more realistic realist and positive positivist than Mach, Avenarius and
Co.—in order to understand how contemptuously Engels would have greeted
the present infatuation of a group of Marxists with “recent positivism,”
the “latest realism,” etc.

Marx and Engels were partisans in philosophy from start to finish, they
were able to detect the deviations from materialism and concessions to
idealism and fideism in each and every “new” tendency. They therefore
appraised Huxley _exclusively_ from the standpoint of his materialist
consistency. They therefore rebuked Feuerbach for not pursuing
materialism to the end, for renouncing materialism because of the errors
of individual materialists, for combating religion in order to renovate
it or invent a new religion, for being unable, in sociology, to rid
himself of idealist phraseology and become a materialist.

And whatever particular mistakes he committed in his exposition of
dialectical materialism, J. Dietzgen fully appreciated and took over
this great and most precious tradition of his teachers. Dietzgen sinned
much by his clumsy deviations from materialism, but he never attempted
to dissociate himself from it in principle, he never attempted to hoist
a “new” standard and always at the decisive moment he firmly and
categorically declared: I am a materialist; our philosophy is a
materialist philosophy. “Of all parties,” our Joseph Dietzgen justly
said, “the middle   party is the most repulsive. . . . Just as parties
in politics are more and more becoming divided into two camps . . . so
science too is being divided into two general classes
_(Generalklassen)_: metaphysicians on the one hand, and physicists, or
materialists, on the other.[3] The intermediate elements and
conciliatory quacks, with their various appellations—spiritualists,
sensationalists, realists, etc., etc.—fall into the current on their
way. We aim at definiteness and clarity. The reactionaries who sound a
retreat _(Retraiteblaser)_ call themselves idealists,^([4]) and
materialists should be the name for all who are striving to liberate the
human mind from the metaphysical spell. . . . If we compare the two
parties respectively to solid and liquid, between them there is a
mush.”^([5])

True! The “realists,” etc., including the “positivists,” the Machians,
etc., are all a wretched mush; they are a contemptible _middle party_ in
philosophy, who confuse the materialist and idealist trends on every
question. The attempt to escape these two basic trends in philosophy is
nothing but “conciliatory quackery.”

J. Dietzgen had not the slightest doubt that the “scientific
priestcraft” of idealist philosophy is simply the antechamber to open
priestcraft. “Scientific priestcraft,” he wrote, “is seriously
endeavouring to assist religious priestcraft” (op. cit., p. 51). “In
particular, the sphere of epistemology, the misunderstanding of the
human mind, is such a louse-hole” _(Lausgrube)_ in which both kinds of
priests “lay their eggs.” “Graduated flunkeys,” who with their talk of
“ideal blessings” stultify the people by their tortuous _(geschraubte)_
“idealism” (p. 53)—that is J. Dietzgen’s opinion of the professors of
philosophy. “Just as the antipodes of the good God is the devil, so the
professorial priest _(Kathederpfaffen)_ has his opposite pole in the
materialist.” The materialist theory of knowledge is “a universal weapon
against religious   belief” (p. 55), and not only against the
“notorious, formal and common religion of the priests, but also against
the most refined, elevated professorial religion of muddled
_(benebelter)_ idealists” (p. 58).

Dietzgen was ready to prefer “religious honesty” to the
“half-heartedness” of freethinking professors (p. 60), for “there at
least there is a system,” there we find integral people, people who do
not separate theory from practice. For the Herr Professors “philosophy
is not a science, but a means of defence against Social-Democracy . . .”
(p. 107). “All who call themselves philosophers, professors, and
university lecturers are, despite their apparent freethinking, more or
less immersed in superstition and mysticism . . . and in relation to
Social-Democracy constitute a single . . . reactionary mass” (p. 108).
“Now, in order to follow the true path, without being led astray by all
the religious and philosophical gibberish _(Welsch),_ it is necessary to
study the falsest of all false paths _(der Holzweg der Holzwege),_
philosophy” (p. 103).

Let us now examine Mach, Avenarius and their school from the standpoint
of parties in philosophy. Oh, these gentlemen _boast_ of their
_non-partisanship,_ and if they have an antipodes, it is the
_materialist_ . . . and _only_ the materialist. A red thread that runs
through _all_ the writings of _all_ the Machians is the stupid claim to
have “risen above” materialism and idealism, to have transcended this
“obsolete” antithesis; but _in fact_ the whole fraternity are
_continually_ sliding into idealism and are conducting a steady and
incessant struggle against materialism. The subtle epistemological
crotchets of a man like Avenarius are but professorial inventions, an
attempt to form a small philosophical sect “of his own”; but, _as a
matter of fact,_ in the general circumstances of the struggle of ideas
and trends in modern society, the _objective_ part played by these
epistemological artifices is in every case the same, namely, to clear
the way for idealism and fideism, and to serve them faithfully. In fact,
it cannot be an accident that the small school of empirio-criticists is
acclaimed by the English spiritualists, like Ward, by the French
neo-criticists, who praise Mach for his attack on materialism, and by
the German immanentists! Dietzgen’s expression, “graduated flunkeys of
fideism,” hits   the nail on the head in the case of Mach, Avenarius and
their whole school.[6]

It is the misfortune of the Russian Machians, who under took to
“reconcile” Machism and Marxism, that they trusted the reactionary
professors of philosophy and as a result slipped down an inclined plane.
The methods of operation employed in the various attempts to develop and
supplement Marx were not very ingenious. They read Ostwald, believe
Ostwald, paraphrase Ostwald and call it Marxism. They read Mach, believe
Mach, paraphrase Mach and call it Marxism. They read Poincaré, believe
Poincaré, paraphrase Poincaré and call it Marxism! _Not a single one_ of
these professors, who are capable of making very valuable contributions
in the special fields of chemistry, history, or physics, _can be trusted
one iota_ when it comes to philosophy. Why? For the same reason that
_not a single_ professor of political economy, who may be capable of
very valuable contributions in the field of factual and specialised
investigations, can be trusted _one iota_ when it comes to the general
theory of political economy. For in modern society the latter is as much
a _partisan_ science as is _epistemology_. Taken as a whole, the
professors of economics are nothing but learned   salesmen of the
capitalist class, while the professors of philosophy are learned
salesmen of the theologians.

The task of Marxists in both cases is to be able to master and adapt the
achievements of these “salesmen” (for instance, you will not make the
slightest progress in the investigation of new economic phenomena unless
you have recourse to the works of these salesmen) and _to be able_ to
lop off their reactionary tendency, to pursue your _own_ line and to
combat the _whole alignment_ of forces and classes hostile to us. And
this is just what our Machians were unable to do, they _slavishly_
follow the lead of the reactionary professorial philosophy. “Perhaps we
have gone astray, but we are seeking,” wrote Lunacharsky in the name of
the authors of the _Studies_. The trouble is that it is not _you_ who
are seeking, but you who are _being sought_ ! You do not go with your,
_i.e.,_ Marxist (for you want to be Marxists), standpoint to every
change in the bourgeois philosophical fashion; the fashion comes to you,
foists upon you its new surrogates got up in the idealist taste, one day
_à la_ Ostwald, the next day _à la_ Mach, and the day after _à la_
Poincaré. These silly “theoretical” devices (“energetics,” “elements,”
“introjections,” etc.) in which you so naïvely believe are confined to a
narrow and tiny school, while the ideological and _social tendency_ of
these devices is immediately spotted by the Wards, the neo-criticists,
the immanentists, the Lopatins and the pragmatists, and _it serves their
purposes_. The infatuation for empirio-criticism and “physical” idealism
passes as rapidly as the infatuation for Neo-Kantianism and
“physiological” idealism; but fideism takes its toll from every such
infatuation and modihes its devices in a thousand ways for the benefit
of philosophical idealism.

The attitude towards religion and the attitude towards natural science
excellently illustrate the _actual_ class use made of empirio-criticism
by bourgeois reactionaries.

Take the first question. Do you think it is an accident that in a
collective work directed _against_ the philosophy of Marxism Lunacharsky
went so far as to speak of the “deification of the higher human
potentialities,” of “religious atheism,” etc.?^([7]) If you do, it is
only because the   Russian Machians have not informed the public
correctly regarding the _whole_ Machian current in Europe and the
attitude of this current to religion. Not only is this attitude in no
way similar to the attitude of Marx, Engels, J. Dietzgen and even
Feuerbach, but it is the _very opposite,_ beginning with Petzoldt’s
statement to the effect that empirio-criticism “contradicts neither
theism nor atheism” _(Einführung in die Philosophie der reinen
Erfahrung,_ Bd. I, S. 351), or Mach’s declaration that “religious
opinion is a private affair” (French trans., p. 434), and ending with
the _explicit fideism,_ the explicitly _arch-reactionary_ views of
Cornelius, who praises Mach and whom Mach praises, of Carus and of all
the immanentists. The neutrality of a _philosopher_ in this question _is
in itself_ servility to fideism, and Mach and Avenarius, because of the
very premises of their epistemology, do not and cannot rise above
neutrality.

Once you deny objective reality, given us in sensation, you have already
lost every one of your weapons against fideism, for you have slipped
into agnosticism or subjectivism—and that is all fideism wants. If the
perceptual world is objective reality, then the door is closed to every
other “reality” or quasi-reality (remember that Bazarov believed the
“realism” of the immanentists, who declare God to be a “real concept”).
If the world is matter in motion, matter can and must be infinitely
studied in the infinitely complex and detailed manifestations and
ramifications of _this_ motion, the motion of _this_ matter; but beyond
it, beyond the “physical,” external world, with which everyone is
familiar, there can be nothing. And the hostility to materialism and the
showers of abuse heaped on the materialists are all in the order of
things in civilised and democratic Europe. All this is going on to this
day. All this is being _concealed_ from the public by the Russian
Machians, who have _not once_ attempted even simply to compare the
attacks made on materialism by Mach, Avenarius, Petzoldt and Co., with
the statements made _in favour_ of materialism by Feuerbach, Marx,
Engels and J. Dietzgen.

But this “concealment” of the attitude of Mach and Avenarius to fideism
will not avail. The facts speak for   themselves. No efforts can release
these reactionary professors from the pillory in which they have been
placed by the kisses of Ward, the neo-criticists, Schuppe,
Schubert-Soldern, Leclair, the pragmatists, etc. And the influence of
the persons mentioned, as philosophers and professors, the popularity of
their ideas among the “educated,” _i.e.,_ the bourgeois, public and the
specific literature they have created are ten times wider and richer
than the particular little school of Mach and Avenarius. The little
school serves those it should serve, and it is exploited as it deserves
to be exploited.

The shameful things to which Lunacharsky has stooped are not
exceptional; they are the product of empirio-criticism, both Russian and
German. They cannot be defended on the grounds of the “good intentions”
of the author, or the “special meaning” of his words; if it were the
direct and common, _i.e.,_ the directly fideistic meaning, we should not
stop to discuss matters with the author, for most likely not a single
Marxist could be found in whose eyes such statements would _not_ have
placed Anatole Lunacharsky _exactly_ in the same category as Peter
Struve. If this is not the case (and it is not the case _yet),_ it is
exclusively because we perceive the “special” meaning and are _fighting
while there is still ground_ for a fight on comradely lines. This is
just the disgrace of Lunacharsky’s statements—that he _could_ connect
them with his “good” intentions. This is just the evil of his
“theory”—that it permits the use of _such_ methods or of _such_
conclusions in the pursuit of good intentions. This is just the
trouble—that _at best_ “good” intentions are the subjective affair of
Tom, Dick or Harry, while the _social significance_ of such statements
is undeniable and indisputable, and no reservation or explanation can
mitigate it.

One must be blind not to see the ideological affinity beiween
Lunacharsky’s “deification of the higher human potentialities” and
Bogdanov’s “general substitution” of the psychical for all physical
nature. This is one and the same thought; in the one case it is
expressed principally from the aesthetic standpoint, and in the other
from the epistemological standpoint. “Substitution,” approaching the
subject _taciitly_ and from a different angle, _already deifies_   the
“higher human potentialities,” by divorcing the “psychical” from man and
by substituting an immensely extended, abstract, divinely-lifeless
“psychical in general” for _all physical nature_. And what of
Yushkevich’s “Logos” introduced into the “irrational stream of
experience”?

A single claw ensnared, and the bird is lost. And our Machians have all
become ensnared in idealism, that is, in a diluted and subtle fideism;
they became ensnared from the moment they took “sensation” not as an
image of the external world but as a special “element.” It is nobody’s
sensation, nobody’s mind, nobody’s spirit, nobody’s will—this is what
one inevitably comes to if one does not recognise the materialist theory
that the human mind _reflects_ an objectively real external world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] Karl Grün, _Ludwig Feuerbach in seinem Briefwechsel und Nachlass,_
_sowie in seiner philosophischen Charakterentwicklung,_ I. Bd., Leipzig
1874, S. 361. —_Lenin_

[2] Of the positivist Beesly, Marx, in the letter of December 13, 1870,
speaks as follows: “Professor Beesly is a Comtist and as such obliged to
think up all sorts of crotchets.”^([13]) Compare this with the opinion
given of the positivists of the Huxley type by Engels in 1892.^([14])
—_Lenin_

[3] Here again we have a clumsy and inexact expression: instead of
“metaphysicians,” he should have said “idealists.” Elsewhere Dietzgen
himself contrasts the metaphysicians and the dialecticians. —_Lenin_

[4] Note that Dietzgen has corrected himself and now explains _more
exactly_ which is the party of the enemies of materialism. —_Lenin_

[5] See the article, “Social-Democratic Philosophy,” written in 1876,
_Kleinere philosophische Schriften,_ 1903, S. 135.] —_Lenin_

[6] THIS FOOTNOTE has been moved into BODY OF DOCUMENT.

[7] _Studies,_ pp. 157, 159. In the _Zagranichnaya Gazeta_^([16]) the
same author speaks of “scientific socialism in its religious
significance”   (No. 3, p. 5) and in _Obrazovaniye_,^([17]) 1908, No. 1,
p. 164, he explicitly says: “For a long time a new religion has been
maturing within me.” —_Lenin_

[8] See _Early Writings of K. Marx and F. Engels,_ 1956, Russian
edition, pp. 257-58.

[9] _Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher (German-French. Yearbooks)—_an
annual published in Paris in German, edited by Karl Marx and Arnold
Ruge. Only the first, double number was issued in Feb ruary 1844. It
contained Marx’s works “The Jewish Question” and “Contribution to the
Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Bight. Introduction”, as well as
Engels “Outlines of a Criticism of Political Economy” and “The Position
of England. Thomas Carlyle. ‘Past and Present’\thinspace”. These works
mark the definitive adoption of the standpoint of materialism and
communism by Marx and Engels. Marx’s disagreement in principle with the
bourgeois radical Ruge was the main reason why the journal ceased to
appear.

[10] See K. Marx, _Capital,_ Vol. I, Moscow, 1959, p. 19.

[13] See K. Marx and F. Engels, _Selected Correspondence,_ Moscow.1955,
pp. 290, 306.

[14] See F. Engels’ “Special Introduction to the English Edition of
1892” of his _Socialism: Utopian and Scientific_ (K. Marx and F. Engels,
_Selected Works,_ Vol. II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 99-102).

[11] Lenin is referring to Engels’ works _Anti-Dürhring_ (1878), _Ludwig
Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy_ (1888), “Special
Introduction to the English Edition of 1892” of _Socialism: Utopian and
Scientific_ (see F. Engels, _Anti-Dürhring_ and K. Marx and F. Engels,
_Selected Works,_ Vol. II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 358-402, 93-115).

[12] See K. Marx and F. Bagels, _Selected Works,_ Vol. II, Moscow, 1958,
p. 359.

The turn to Hegel in the second half of the nineteenth century was
characteristic of the development of bourgeois philosophy in a number of
European countries and the U.S.A. In Britain it began with the
appearance in 1865 of James Hutchison Stirling’s book _The Secret of
Hegel._ The bourgeois ideologists were attracted by Hegel’s absolute
idealism, which offered wide opportunities for a theoretical
justification of religion. There developed a special philosophical trend
which was given the name of Anglo-Hegelianism, whose representatives
(Thomas Green, the brothers Edward and John Caird, Francis Bradley and
others) vigorously at tacked materialism, making use of the reactionary
aspects of Hegel’s doctrine.

In the Scandinavian countries, too, Hegelian philosophy became more
influential in the second half of the eighteenth century. In Sweden its
revival was sponsored by Johann Borelius who counterposed Hegelianism to
the prevailing subjective-idealist philosophy. In Norway the Right-wing
Hegelians Marcus Jacob Monrad, G. W. Ling and others interpreted Hegel’s
philosophy in the spirit of mysticism, discarding its rationalism and
trying to sub ordinate science to religion. In Denmark, where Hegelian
philosophy   began to spread even during Hegel’s lifetime, it was
criticised from the same standpoint.

The spread of Hegel’s philosophy did not lead to its revival; the
bourgeois epigones of Hegel “developed” (mainly in the spirit of
subjective idealism) various aspects of his conservative philosophical
system.. All this paved the way for the emergence at the turn of the
century of neo-Hegelian—a reactionary trend of bourgeois philosophical
thought in the imperialist era that attempted to adapt Hegel’s
philosophy to fascist ideology.

[15] _Pragmatism—_a subjective-idealist trend of bourgeois (mainly
American) philosophy in the imperialist era. It arose in the seven ties.
of the last century in the U.S.A. as a reflection of specific features
of the development of American capitalism, replacing the hitherto
prevailing religious philosophy. The main propositions of pragmatism
were formulated by Charles Peirce. As an independent philosophical
tendency it took shape at the turn of the century in the works of
William James and Ferdinand Schiller and was further developed in the
instrumentalism of John Dewey.

The pragmatists consider that the central problem of philosophy is the
attainment of true knowledge. However, they completely distort the very
concept of truth; already Peirce looked on cognition as a purely
psychological, subjective process of achieving religious belief. James
substituted the concept of “usefulness”, of success or advantage, for
the concept of truth, i.e., for the objectively true reflection of
reality. From his point of view, all concepts, including religious ones,
are true insofar as they are useful. Dewey went, even farther by
declaring all scientific theories, all moral principles and social
institutions, to be merely “instruments” for the attainment of the
personal aims of the individual. As the criterion of the “truth”
(usefulness) of knowledge, the pragmatists take experience, understood
not as human social practice but as the constant stream of individual
experiences, of the subjective phenomena of consciousness; they regard
this experience as the solo reality, declaring the concepts of matter
and mind “obsolete”. Like the Machists, the pragmatists claim to have
created a “third line” in philosophy; they try to place themselves above
materialism and idealism, while in fact advocating one of the varieties
of idealism. In contrast to materialist monism, the pragmatists put
forward the standpoint of “pluralism”, according to which there is no
internal connection, no conformity to law, in the universe; it is like a
mosaic which each person builds in his own way, out of his own
individual experiences. Hence, starting out from the needs of the given
moment, pragmatism considers it possible to give different, even
contradictory, explanations of one and the same phenomenon. Consistency
is declared to be unnecessary; if it is to a man’s advantage, he can be
a determinist or an indeterminist, he can assert or deny the existence
of God, and so on.

By basing themselves on the subjective-idealist tradition of English
philosophy from Berkeley and Hume to John Stuart Mill, by exploiting
particular aspects of the theories of Kant, Mach   and Avenarius,
Nietzsche and Henri Bergson, the American pragmatists created one of the
most reactionary philosophical trends of modern times, a convenient form
for theoretically defending the interests of the imperialist
bourgeoisie. It is for this reason that pragmatism spread so widely in
the U.S.A., becoming almost the official American philosophy. There have
been advocates of pragmatism at various times in Italy, Germany, France,
Czechoslovakia and other countries.

[16] _Zagranichnaya Gazetz (Gazette Etrangére)_—the weekly newspaper of
a group of Russian emigrants, published in Geneva from March 16 to April
13, 1908. The four numbers that appeared during this period dealt mainly
with the life of Russian emigrants and carried material on events in
Russia and abroad. The second number published Lenin’s speech “Lessons
of the Commune” at an international meeting in Geneva on March 18, 1908.
The newspaper contained propaganda for god-building and Machism
(articles by A. Bogdanov and A. V. Lunacharsky).

Lenin quotes a passage from A. V. Lunacharsky’s “Sketches of Modem
Russian Literature”, which was published in Nos. 2 and 3 of the
newspaper.

[17] _Obrazovaniye (Education)_—a legal monthly literary magazine of a
popular scientific and socio-political character published in St.
Petersburg from 1892 to 1909. In 1902-08 it printed articles by
Social-Democrats. In No. 2, 1906, the magazine printed Chapters V-IX of
Lenin’s work “The Agrarian Crisis and the ‘Critics of Marx’\thinspace”.

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: 5. ERNST HAECKEL AND ERNST MACH


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

( Chapter Six: Empirio-Criticism and Historical Materialism )

5. Ernst Haeckel and Ernst Mach

Let us now examine the attitude of Machism, as a _philosophical
current,_ towards the natural sciences. All Machism, from beginning to
end, _combats_ the “metaphysics” of the natural sciences, this being the
name they give to _natural-scientific materialism,_ _i.e.,_ to the
instinctive, unwitting, unformed, philosophically unconscious conviction
shared by the overwhelming majority of scientists regarding the
objective reality of the external world reflected by our consciousness.
And our Machians maintain a skulking silence regarding this _fact_ and
obscure or confuse the _inseparable_ connection between the instinctive
materialism of the natural scientists and _philosophical materialism_ as
a trend, a trend known long ago and hundreds of times affirmed by Marx
and Engels.

Take Avenarius. In his very first work, _Philosophie als Denken der Welt
gemäss dem Prinzip des kleinsten Kraftmasses,_ published in 1876, he
attacked the metaphysics of the natural sciences,[§ 79, 114,etc.]
_i.e.,_ natural-scientific materialism, and, as he himself admitted in
1891 (without, however, “correcting” his views!), attacked it from the
standpoint of epistemological idealism.

Take Mach. From 1872 (or even earlier) down to 1906 he waged continuous
war on the metaphysics of natural science. However, he was conscientious
enough to admit that his views were shared by “a number of philosophers”
(the immanentists included), but by “_very few_ scientists” _(Analysis
of Sensations,_ p. 9). In 1906 Mach also honestly admitted that the
“majority of scientists adhere to materialism” _(Erkenntnis und Irrtum,_
2. Aufl., S. 4).

Take Petzoldt. In 1900 he proclaimed that the “natural sciences are
thoroughly _(ganz und gar)_ imbued with metaphysics.” “Their
‘experience’ has still to be purified” _(Einführung in die Philosophie
der reinen Erfahrung,_ Bd. I, S. 343). We know that Avenarius and
Petzoldt “purify” experience of all recognition of the objective reality
given us in sensation. In 1904 Petzoldt declared: “The mechanical world
outlook of the modern scientist is essentially no better than that of
the ancient Indians. . . . It makes no difference whether the world
rests on a mythical elephant or on just as mythical a swarm of molecules
and atoms epistemologically thought of as real and therefore not used
merely metaphorically _(bloss bildlich)_” (Bd. II, S. 176).

Take Willy, the only Machian decent enough to be ashamed of his kinship
with the immanentists. Yet, in 1905 he too declared: “. . . The natural
sciences, after all, are also in many respects an authority of which we
must rid ourselves” _(Gegen die Schulweisheit,_ S. 158).

But this is all _sheer obscurantism,_ out-and-out reaction. To regard
atoms, molecules, electrons, etc., as an approximately true reflection
in our mind of the _objectively real movement of matter_ is equivalent
to believing in an elephant upon which the world rests! No wonder that
this _obscurantist,_ decked in the cap and bells of fashionable
positivism, was greeted by the immanentists _with open arms_. There is
_not a single_ immanentist who would not furiously attack the
“metaphysics” of science, the “materialism” of the scientists,
_precisely because of the recognition_ by the scientists of the
objective reality of matter (and its particles), time, space, laws of
nature, etc., etc. Long before the new discoveries in physics which gave
rise to “physical idealism” were made, Leclair, using Mach as a support,
  combated “The Predominant Materialist Trend _(Grundzug)_ of Modern
Science” (the title of § 6 of _Der Realismus usw_., 1879),
Schubert-Soldern fought “The Metaphysics of Natural Science” (the title
of Chapter II of _Grundlagen einer Erkenntnistheorie,_ 1884) Rehmke
battled with natural-scientific “materialism,” that “_metaphysics of the
street_” _(Philosophie und Kantianismus,_ 1882, S. 17), etc., etc.

And the immanentists quite legitimately drew _direct and outspoken_
fideist conclusions from this _Machian_ idea of the “metaphysical
character” of natural-scientific materialism. If natural science in its
theories depicts not objective reality, but _only_ metaphors, symbols,
forms of human experience etc., it is beyond dispute that humanity is
entitled to create for itself in another sphere _no less_ “_real_
concepts,” such as God, and so forth.

The philosophy of the scientist Mach is to science what the kiss of the
Christian Judas was to Christ. Mach likewise betrays science into the
hands of fideism by virtually deserting to the camp of philosophical
idealism. Mach’s renunciation of natural-scientific materialism is a
reactionary phenomenon in every respect. We saw this quite clearly when
we spoke of the struggle of the “physical idealists” against the
_majority_ of scientists, who continue to maintain the standpoint of the
old philosophy. We shall see it still more clearly if we compare the
eminent scientist, Ernst Haeckel, with the eminent (among the
reactionary philistines) philosopher, Ernst Mach.

The storm provoked by Ernst Haeckel’s _The Riddle of the Universe_ in
every civilised country strikingly brought out, on the one hand, the
_partisan character_ of philosophy in modern society and, on the other,
the true social significance of the struggle of materialism against
idealism and agnosticism. The fact that the book was sold in _hundreds
of thousands_ of copies, that it was immediately translated into all
languages and that it appeared in specially cheap editions, clearly
demonstrates that the book “has found its way to the masses,” that there
are multitudes of readers whom Ernst Haeckel at once won over to his
side. This popular little book became a weapon in the class struggle.
The professors of philosophy and theology in every country of the world
set about denouncing and annihilating Haeckel   in every possible way.
The eminent English physicist Lodge hastened to defend God against
Haeckel. The Russian physicist Mr. Chwolson went to Germany to publish a
vile reactionary pamphlet attacking Haeckel and to assure the
respectable philistines that not all scientists now hold the position of
“naïve realism.”[1] There is no counting the theologians who joined the
campaign against Haeckel. There was no abuse not showered on him by the
official professors of philosophy.^([2]) It was amusing to see
how—perhaps for the first time in their lives—the eyes of these mummies,
dried and shrunken in the atmosphere of lifeless scholasticism, began to
gleam and their cheeks to glow under the slaps which Haeckel
administered them. The high-priests of pure science, and, it would
appear, of the most abstract theory, fairly groaned with rage. And
throughout all the howling of the philosophical diehards (the idealist
Paulsen, the immanentist Rehmke, the Kantian Adickes, and the others
whose name, god wot, is legion) one underlying motif is clearly
discernible: they are all against the “_metaphysics_” of science,
against “dogmatism,” against “the exaggeration of the value and
significance of science,” against “natural-scientific _materialism_.” He
is a materialist—at him! at the materialist! He is deceiving the public
by not calling him self a materialist directly!—that is what
particularly incenses the worthy professors.

And the noteworthy thing in all this tragi-comedy^([3]) is the fact that
Haeckel himself _renounces materialism_ and rejects the appellation.
What is more, far from rejecting religion altogether, he has invented
his own religion (something like Bulgakov’s “atheistic faith” or
Lunacharsky’s “religious atheism”), and on grounds of _principle_  
advocates a union of religion and science. What then is it all about?
What “fatal misunderstanding” started the row?

The point is that Haeckel’s philosophical naïvete, his lack of definite
partisan aims, his anxiety to respect the prevailing philistine
prejudice against materialism, his personal conciliatory tendencies and
proposals concerning religion, all this gave the greater salience to
_the general spirit_ of his book, the _ineradicability_ of
natural-scientific materialism and its _irreconcilability_ with _all_
official professorial philosophy and theology. Haeckel personally does
not seek a rupture with the philistines, but what he expounds with such
unshakeably naïve conviction is _absolutely_ incompatible with any of
the shades of prevailing philosophical idealism. All these shades, from
the crudest reactionary theories of a Hartmann, to Petzoldt, who fancies
himself the latest, most progressive and advanced of the positivists,
and the empirio-criticist Mach—_all_ are agreed that natural-scientific
materialism is “metaphysics,” that the recognition of an objective
reality underlying the theories and conclusions of science is sheer
“naïve realism,” etc. And for this doctrine, “sacred” to _all_
professorial philosophy and theology, every page of Haeckel is a _slap
in the face_. This scientist, who undoubtedly expressed the very firmly
implanted, although unformed opinions, sentiments and tendencics of the
overwhelming majority of the scientists of the end of the nineteenth and
the beginning of the twentieth century, instantly, easily and simply
revealed what professorial philosophy tried to conceal from the public
and from itself, namely, the fact that there is a foundation, growing
ever wider and firmer, which shatters all the efforts and strivings of
the thousand and one little schools of philosophical idealism,
positivism, realism, empirio-criticism and other confusionism. This
foundation is _natural-scientific materialism_. The conviction of the
“naïve realists” (in other words, of all humanity) that our sensations
are images of an objectively real external world is the conviction of
the mass of scientists, one that is steadily growing and gaining in
strength.

The cause of the founders of new philosophical schools and of the
inventors of new epistemological “isms” is   lost, irrevocably and
hopelessly. They may flounder about in their “original” petty systems;
they may strive to engage the attention of a few admirers in the
interesting controversy as to who was the first to exclaim, “Eh!”—the
empirio-critical Bobchinsky, or the empirio-monistic Dobchinsky[8]; they
may even devote themselves to creating an extensive “special”
literature, like the “immanentists.” But the course of development of
science, despite its vacillations and hesitations, despite the unwitting
character of the materialism of the scientists, despite yesterday’s
infatuation with fashionable “physiological idealism” or today’s
infatuation with fashionable “physical idealism,” is _sweeping aside_
all the petty systems and artifices and once again bringing to the
forefront the “metaphysics” of _natural-scientific materialism_.

Here is an illustration of this from Haeckel. In his _The Wonders of
Life,_ Haeckel compares the monistic and dualistic theories of
knowledge. We give the most interesting points of the comparison^([4]) :

  THE MONISTIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              THE DUALISTIC THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  3. Cognition is a physiological process, whose anatomical organ is the brain                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3. Cognition is not a physiological but a purely spiritual process.
  4. The only part of the human brain in which knowledge is engendered is a spatially limited sphere of the cortex the phronema.                                                                                                                                                                                                4. The part of the human brain which appears to function as the organ of knowledge is in fact only the instrument that permits the spiritual process to manifest itself.
  5. The phronema is a highly perfected dynamo,   the individual parts of which,thephroneta, consist of millions of cells (phronetal cells). Just as in the case of every other organ of the body, so in the case of this mental organ, its function, the “mind,” is the sum-total of the functions of its constituent cells.   5. The phronema as the _organ_of reason is not autonomous, but, through its constituent parts(phroneta)and the cells that com- pose them, serves only as intermediary between the non-material mind and the external world. Human reason differs absolutely from the mind of the higher animal sand from the instinct of the lower animals.

This typical quotation from his works shows that Haeckel does not
attempt an analysis of philosophical problems and is not able to
contrast the materialist theory of knowledge with the idealist theory of
knowledge. He _ridicules all_ idealist—more broadly, all peculiarly
philosophical—artifices from the standpoint of natural science, _without
even permitting the idea_ that any other theory of knowledge but
_natural-scientific materialism_ is possible. He ridicules the
philosophers from the standpoint of a materialist, _without himself
realising_ that his standpoint is that of a materialist!

The impotent wrath aroused in the philosophers by this almighty
materialism is comprehensible. We quoted above the opinion of the
“true-Russian” Lopatin. And here is the opinion of Mr. Rudolf Willy, the
most progressive of the “empirio-criticists,” who is irreconcilably
hostile to idealism (don’t laugh!). “Haeckel’s monism is a very
heterogeneous mixture: it unites certain natural-scientific laws, such
as the law of the conservation of energy . . . with certain scholastic
traditions about substance and the thing-in-itself into a chaotic
jumble” _(Gegen die Schulweisheit,_ S. 128).

What has annoyed this most worthy “recent positivist”? Well, how could
he help being annoyed when he immediately realised that from Haeckel’s
standpoint all the great doctrines of his teacher Avenarius—for
instance, that the brain is not the organ of thought, that sensations
are not images of the external world, that matter (“substance”) or “the
thing-in-itself” is not an objective reality, and so   forth—are nothing
but _sheer idealist gibberish_ !? Haeckel did not say it in so many
words because he did not concern himself with philosophy and was not
acquainted with “empirio-criticism” _as such_. But Rudolf Willy could
not help realising that a hundred thousand Haeckel readers meant as many
people spitting in the face of the _philosophy_ of Mach and Avenarius.
Willy wipes his face in advance, _in the Lopatin manner_. For the
_essence_ of the arguments which Mr. Lopatin and Mr. Willy marshal
against materialism in general and natural-scientific materialism in
particular, is exactly the same in both. To us Marxists the difference
between Mr. Lopatin and Messrs. Willy, Petzoldt, Mach and Co. is no
greater than the difference between the Protestant theologians and the
Catholic theologians.

The “war” on Haeckel _has proven_ that this view of ours corresponds to
_objective reality,_ _i.e.,_ to the class nature of modern society and
its class ideological tendencies.

Here is another little example. The Machian Kleinpeter has translated
from English into German, under the title of _Das Weltbild der modernen
Naturwissenschaft_ [_World Picture from the Standpoint of Modern Natural
Science_] (Leipzig, 1905), a work by Carl Snyder well known in America.
This work gives a clear and popular account of a number of recent
discoveries in physics and other branches of science. And the Machian
Kleinpeter felt himself called upon to supply the book with a preface in
which he makes certain _reservations,_ such as, for example, that
Snyder’s epistemology is “not satisfactory” (p. v). Why so? Because
Snyder never entertains the slightest doubt that the world picture is a
picture of how matter moves and of how “_matter thinks_” (p. 228). In
his next book, _The World Machine_ (London and New York, 1907), Snyder,
referring to the fact that his book is dedicated to the memory of
Democritus of Abdera, who lived about 460-360 B.C., says: “Democritus
has often been styled the grandsire of materialism. It is a school of
philosophy that is a little out of fashion nowadays; yet it is worthy of
note that practically all of the modern advance in our ideas of this
world has been grounded upon his conceptions. Practically speaking,
materialistic assumptions are simply _unescapable_ in physical
investigations” (p. 140).

“. . . If he like, he may dream with good Bishop Berkeley that it is all
a dream. Yet comforting as may be the leger-demain of an idealised
idealism, there are still few among us who, whatever they may think
regarding the problem of the external world, doubt that they themselves
exist; and it needs no long pursuit of the will-o’-the-wisps of the
_Ich_ and _non-Ich_ to assure oneself that if in an unguarded moment we
assume that we ourselves have a personality and a being, we let in the
whole procession of appearances which come of the six gates of the
senses. The nebular hypothesis, the light-bearing ether, the atomic
theory, and all their like, may be but convenient ‘working hypotheses,’
but it is well to remember that, in the absence of negative proof, they
stand on more or less the same footing as the hypothesis that a being
you call ‘you,’ Oh, Indulgent Reader, scans these lines” (pp. 31-32).

Imagine the bitter lot of a Machian when his favourite subtle
constructions, which reduce the categories of science to mere working
hypotheses, are laughed at by the scientists on both sides of the ocean
as sheer nonsense! Is it to be wondered that Rudolf Willy, _in 1905,_
combats Democritus as though he were a living enemy, thereby providing
an excellent illustration of the _partisan character of philosophy_ and
once more exposing the real position he himself takes up in this
partisan struggle? He writes: “Of course, Democritus was not conscious
of the fact that atoms and the void are only fictitious concepts which
perform mere accessory services _(blosse Handlangerdienste),_ and
maintain their existence only by grace of expediency, just as long as
they prove useful. Democritus was not free enough for this; but neither
are our modern natural scientists, with few exceptions. The faith of old
Democritus is the faith of our scientists” (op. cit., p. 57).

And there is good reason for despair! The “empirio-criticists” have
proven in quite a “new way” that both space and atoms are “working
hypotheses”; and yet the natural scientists deride this _Berkeleianism_
and follow Haeckel. We are by no means idealists, this is a slander; we
are only striving (together with the idealists) to refute the
epistemological line of Democritus; we have been   striving to do so for
more than 2,000 years, but all in vain! And nothing better remains for
our leader Ernst Mach to do than to dedicate his last work, the outcome
of his life and philosophy, _Erkenntnis und Irrtum,_ to _Wilhelm
Schuppe_ and to remark ruefully in the text that the majority of
scientists are materialists and that “we also” _sympathise_ with Haeckel
. . . for his “freethinking” (p. 14).

And there he completely betrays himself, this ideologist of reactionary
philistinism who follows the arch-reactionary Schuppe and
“_sympathises_” with Haeckel’s freethinking. They are all like this,
these humanitarian philistines in Europe, with their freedom-loving
sympathies and their ideological (political and economic) captivity to
the Wilhelm Schuppes.^([5]) Non-partisanship in philosophy is only
wretchedly masked servility to idealism and fideism.

Let us, in conclusion, compare this with the opinion of Haeckel held by
Franz Mehring, who not only wants to be, but who knows how to be a
Marxist. The moment _The Riddle of the Universe_ appeared, towards the
end of 1899, Mehring pointed out that “Haeckel’s work, both in its less
good and its very good aspects, is eminently adapted to help clarify the
apparently rather confused views prevailing in the party as to the
significance for it of _historical_ materialism, on the one hand, and
historical _materialism,_ on the other.”^([6]) Haeckel’s defect is that
he has not the slightest conception of _historical_ materialism, which
leads him to utter the most woeful nonsense about politics, about
“monistic religion,” and so on and so forth. “Haeckel is a materialist
and monist, not a _historical_ but a natural-scientific materialist”
_(ibid_.).

“He who wants to perceive this inability [of natural-scientific
materialism to deal with social problems] tangibly, he who wants to be
convinced that natural-scientific materialism must be broadened into
historical materialism   if it is really to be an invincible weapon in
the great struggle for the liberation of mankind, let him read Haeckel’s
book.

“But let him not read it for this purpose alone! Its uncommonly weak
side is inseparably bound up with its uncommonly strong side, _viz_.,
with the comprehensible and luminous description (which after all takes
up by far the greater and more important part of the book) given by
Haeckel of the development of the natural sciences in this [the 19th]
century, or, in other words, of the _triumphant march of
natural-scientific materialism_.”^([7])

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

Notes

[1] O. D. Chwolson. _Hegel,_ _Haeckel,_ _Kossuth und das zwölfte Gebot_
[_Hegel,_ _Haeckel,_ _Kossnth and the Twelfth Commandment_], 1906, _cf_.
S. 80. —_Lenin_

[2] The pamphlet of Heinrich Schmidt, _Der Kempf und die Welträtsel_
[_The Fight over “The Riddle of the Universe_”] (Bonn, 1900), gives a
fairly good picture of the campaign launched against Haeckel by the
professors of philosophy and theology. But this pamphlet is already very
much out-of-date. —_Lenin_

[3] THIS FOOTNOTE has been moved into BODY OF DOCUMENT.

[4] I use the French translation, _Les merveilles de la vie,_ Paris,
Schleicher, Tables I et XVI.] —_Lenin_

[5] THIS FOOTNOTE has been moved into BODY OF DOCUMENT.

[6] Fr. Mehring, “_Die Weltratsel_” [_The Riddle of the Universe_],
_Neue Zeit,_ 1899-1900, XVIII, 1, 418. —_Lenin_

[7] _Ibid_., p. 419. —_Lenin_

[8] _Bobchinsky, Dobchiasky—_two closely similar characters in Gogol’s
comedy _Inspector-General,_ chatterers and tale-bearers.

[9] Lenin is referring to two booklets by Machist Mensheviks published
in 1908: N. Valentinov’s _PhilosophicaL Constructions of Marxism_ and P.
Yushkevich’s _Materialism and Critical Realism._

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: CONCLUSION


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

Conclusion

There are four standpoints from which a Marxist must proceed to form a
judgment of empirio-criticism.

First and foremost, the theoretical foundations of this philosophy must
be compared with those of dialectical materialism. Such a comparison, to
which the first three chapters were devoted, reveals, _along the whole
line_ of epistemological problems, the _thoroughly reactionary_
character of empirio-criticism, which uses new artifices, terms and
subtleties to disguise the old errors of _idealism and agnosticism_.
Only utter ignorance of the nature of philosophical materialism
generally and of the nature of Marx’s and Engels’ dialectical method can
lead one to speak of “combining” empirio-criticism and Marxism.

Secondly, the place of empirio-criticism, as one very small school of
specialists in philosophy, in relation to the other modern schools of
philosophy must be determined. Both Mach and Avenarius started with Kant
and, leaving him, proceeded not towards materialism, but in the opposite
direction, towards Hume and Berkeley. Imagining that he was “purifying
experience” generally, Avenarius was in fact only purifying agnosticism
of Kantianism. The whole school of Mach and Avenarius is moving more and
more definitely towards idealism, hand in hand with one of the most
reactionary of the idealist schools, _viz_., the so-called immanentists.

Thirdly, the indubitable connection between Machism and one school in
one branch of modern science must be borne in mind. The vast majority of
scientists, both generally and in this special branch of science in
question, _viz_., physics, are invariably on the side of materialism.  
A minority of new physicists, however, influenced by the breakdown of
old theories brought about by the great discoveries of recent years,
influenced by the crisis in the new physics, which has very clearly
revealed the relativity of our knowledge, have, owing to their ignorance
of dialectics, slipped into idealism by way of relativism. The physical
idealism in vogue today is as reactionary and transitory an infatuation
as was the fashionable physiological idealism of the recent past.

Fourthly, behind the epistemological scholasticism of empirio-criticism
one must not fail to see the struggle of parties in philosophy, a
struggle which in the last analysis reflects the tendencies and ideology
of the antagonistic classes in modern society. Recent philosophy is as
partisan as was philosophy two thousand years ago. The contending
parties are essentially, although it is concealed by a pseudo-erudite
quackery of new terms or by a feeble-minded non-partisanship,
materialism and idealism. The latter is merely a subtle, refined form of
fideism, which stands fully armed, commands vast organisations and
steadily continues to exercise influence on the masses, turning the
slightest vacillation in philosophical thought to its own advantage. The
objective, class role of empirio-criticism consists entirely in
rendering faithful service to the fideists in their struggle against
materialism in general and historical materialism in particular.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

Notes

------------------------------------------------------------------------



LENIN: 1908/MEC: SUPPLEMENT TO CHAPTER FOUR, SECTION I


MATERIALISM and EMPIRIO-CRITICISM

Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

  

Supplement to Chapter Four, SECTION I[1] ^([2])

From What Angle Did N. G. Chernyshevsky Criticise Kantianism?

In the first section of Chapter IV we showed in detail that the
materialists have been criticising Kant from a standpoint diametrically
opposite to that from which Mach and Avenarius criticise him. It would
not be superfluous to add here, albeit briefly, an indication of the
epistemological position held by the great Russian Hegelian and
materialist, N. G. Chernyshevsky.

Shortly after Albrecht Rau, the German disciple of Feuerbach, had
published his criticism of Kant, the great Russian writer N. G.
Chernyshevsky, who was also a disciple of Feuerbach, first attempted an
explicit statement of his attitude towards both Feuerbach and Kant.
N. G. Chernyshevsky had appeared in Russian literature as a follower of
Feuerbach as early as the ’fifties, but our censorship did not allow him
even to mention Feuerbach’s name. In 1888, in the preface to the
projected third edition of his _The Aesthetic Relation of Art to
Reality,_ N. G. Chernyshevsky attempted to allude directly to Feuerbach,
but in 1888 too the censor refused to allow even a mere reference to
Feuerbach! It was not until 1906 that the preface saw the light (see
N. G. Chernyshevsky, _Collected Works,_ Vol. X, Part II, pp. 190-97). In
this preface N. G. Chernyshevsky devotes half a page to criticising Kant
and the scientists who follow Kant in their philosophical conclusions.

Here is the excellent argument given by Chernyshevsky in 1888:

“Natural scientists who imagine themselves to be builders of
all-embracing theories are really disciples, and usually poor disciples,
of the ancient thinkers who evolved the metaphysical systems, usually
thinkers whose systems had already been partially destroyed by Schelling
and finally destroyed by Hegel. One need only point out that the
majority of the natural scientists who endeavour to construct broad
theories of the laws of operation of human thought only repeat Kant’s
metaphysical theory regarding the subjectivity of our knowledge. . . .”
(For the benefit of the Russian Machians who manage to muddle
everything, let us say that Chernyshevsky is below Engels in so far as
in his terminology he confuses the opposition between materialism and
idealism with the opposition between metaphysical thought and
dialectical thought; but Chernyshevsky is entirely on Engels’ level in
so far as he takes Kant to task not for realism, but for agnosticism and
subjectivism, not for recognition of the “thing-in-itself,” but for
inability to derive our knowledge from this objective source.) “. . .
they argue from Kant’s words that the forms of our sense-perception have
no resemblance to the forms of the actual existence of objects. . . .”
(For the benefit of the Russian Machians who manage to muddle
everything, let us say that Chernyshevsky’s criticism of Kant is the
diametrical opposite of the criticism of Kant by Avenarius, Mach and the
immanentists, because for Chernyshevsky, as for every materialist, the
forms of our sense-perception do resemble the form of the actual—i.e.
objectively-real—existence of objects.) “. . . that, therefore, really
existing objects, their real qualities, and the real relations between
them are unknowable to us. . . .” (For the benefit of the Russian
Machians who manage to muddle everything, let us say that for
Chernyshevsky, as for every materialist, objects, or to use Kant’s
ornate language, “things-in-themselves,” _really_ exist and are _fully_
knowable to us, knowable in their existence, their qualities and the
real relations between them.) “. . . and if they were knowable they
could not be the object of our thought, which shapes all the material of
knowledge into forms totally different from the forms of   actual
existence, that, moreover, the very laws of thought have only a
subjective significance. . . .” (For the benefit of the Machian
muddlers, let us say that for Chernyshevsky, as for every materialist,
the laws of thought have not merely a subjective significance; in other
words, the laws of thought reflect the forms of actual existence of
objects, fully resemble, and do not differ from, these forms.) “. . .
that in reality there is nothing corresponding to what appears to us to
be the connection of cause and effect, for there is neither antecedent
nor subsequent, neither whole nor parts, and so on and so forth. . . .”
(For the benefit of the Machian muddlers, let us say that for
Chernyshevsky, as for every materialist, there does exist in reality
what appears to us to be the connection between cause and effect, there
is objective causality or natural necessity.) “. . . When natural
scientists stop uttering such and similar metaphysical nonsense, they
will be capable of working out, and probably will work out, on the basis
of science, a system of concepts more exact and complete than those
propounded by Feuerbach. . . .” (For the benefit of the Machian
muddlers, let us say that Chernyshevsky regards as metaphysical nonsense
_all_ deviations from materialism, both in the direction of idealism and
in the direction of agnosticism.) “. . . But meanwhile, the best
statement of the scientific concepts of the so-called fundamental
problems of man’s inquisitiveness remains that made by Feuerbach” (pp.
195–96). By the fundamental problems of man’s inquisitiveness
Chernyshevsky means what in modern language are known as the fundamental
problems of the theory of knowledge, or epistemology. Chernyshevsky is
the only really great Russian writer who, from the ’fifties until 1888,
was able to keep on the level of an integral philosophical materialism
and who spurned the wretched nonsense of the Neo-Kantians, positivists,
Machians and other muddleheads. But Chernyshevsky did not succeed in
rising, or, rather, owing to the backwardness of Russian life, was
unable to rise, to the level of the dialectical materialism of Marx and
Engels.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Notes

[1] See pp. 194–205 of this volume.—_Ed_.

[2] The manuscript of the “_Supplement to Chapter Four, Section 1,_
‘From What Angle Did N. G. Chernyshevsky Criticise
Kantianism?’\thinspace” was sent by Lenin to A. I. Ulyanova-Yelizarova
in the second half of March, when the book was already in the press. In
a letter to his sister dated March 10 or 11 (23 or 24), 1909, Lenin
wrote in reference to this supplement: “I am sending you a supplement.
It is not worth while delaying on account of it. But if there is time,
put it at the end of the book, after the conclusion, in small print, for
instance. I regard it as extremely important to counterpose
‘Chernyshevsky’ to the Machists.” (_Collected Works_, present edition,
Vol. 37, pp.419–20.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------


References

1.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Preface to the First Edition
    (www.marxists.org)
2.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Preface to the Second Edition
    (www.marxists.org)
3.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: In Lieu of An Introduction
    (www.marxists.org)
4.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Chapter 1.1, Sensations And
    Complexes Of Sensations (www.marxists.org)
5.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Chapter 1.2, “The Discovery of
    the World-Elements” (www.marxists.org)
6.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Chapter 1.3, The Theory of
    Knowledge of Empirio-Criticism and of Dialectical Materialism
    (www.marxists.org)
7.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Chapter 1.4, Did Nature Exist
    Prior to Man? (www.marxists.org)
8.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Chapter 1.5, Does Man Think With
    The Help of the Brain? (www.marxists.org)
9.  Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Chapter 1.6, The Solipsism of
    Mach and Avenarius (www.marxists.org)
10. Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Chapter 2.1, The
    'Thing-In-Itself,' or V. Chernov Refutes Frederick Engels
    (www.marxists.org)
11. Materialism and Empirio-criticism: Chapter 2. (www.marxists.org)
12. Lenin: 1908/mec: 3. L. Feuerbach and J. Dietzgen on the
    Thing-In-Itself (www.marxists.org)
13. Lenin: 1908/mec: 4. Does Objective Truth Exist? (www.marxists.org)
14. Lenin: 1908/mec: 5. Absolute and Relative Truth, or the Eclecticism
    of Engels as Discovered by A. Bogdanov (www.marxists.org)
15. Lenin: 1908/mec: 6. The Criterion of Practice in the Theory of
    Knowledge (www.marxists.org)
16. Lenin: 1908/mec: 1. What Is Matter? What Is Experience?
    (www.marxists.org)
17. Lenin: 1908/mec: 2. Plekhanov's Error Concerning The Concept
    'Experience' (www.marxists.org)
18. Lenin: 1908/mec: 3. Causality And Necessity In Nature
    (www.marxists.org)
19. Lenin: 1908/mec: 4. The 'Principle Of Economy Of Thought' And The
    Problem Of The 'Unity Of The World' (www.marxists.org)
20. Lenin: 1908/mec: 5. Space And Time (www.marxists.org)
21. Lenin: 1908/mec: 6. Freedom and Necessity (www.marxists.org)
22. Lenin: 1908/mec: 1. The Criticism of Kantianism from the Left and
    From the Right (www.marxists.org)
23. Lenin: 1908/mec: 2. How the 'Empirio-Symbolist' Yushkevich Ridiculed
    the 'Empirio-Criticist' Chernov (www.marxists.org)
24. Lenin: 1908/mec: 3.The Immanentists as Comrades-In-Arms of Mach and
    Avenarius (www.marxists.org)
25. Lenin: 1908/mec: 4. Whither is Empirio-Criticism Tending?
    (www.marxists.org)
26. Lenin: 1908/mec: 5. A. Bogdanov's 'Empirio-Monism'
    (www.marxists.org)
27. Lenin: 1908/mec: 6. The 'Theory of Symbols' (or Hieroglyphs) and the
    Criticism of Helmholtz (www.marxists.org)
28. Lenin: 1908/mec: 7. Two Kinds of Criticism of Dühring
    (www.marxists.org)
29. Lenin: 1908/mec: 8. How Could J. Dietzgen Have Found Favour with the
    Reactionary Philosophers? (www.marxists.org)
30. Lenin: 1908/mec: 1. The Crisis in Modern Physics (www.marxists.org)
31. Lenin: 1908/mec: 2. 'Matter Has Disappeared' (www.marxists.org)
32. Lenin: 1908/mec: 3. Is Motion Without Matter Conceivable?
    (www.marxists.org)
33. Lenin: 1908/mec: 4. The Two Trends in Modern Physics and English
    Spiritualism (www.marxists.org)
34. Lenin: 1908/mec: 5. The Two Trends in Modern Physics, and German
    Idealism (www.marxists.org)
35. Lenin: 1908/mec: 6. The Two Trends in Modern Physics and French
    Fideism (www.marxists.org)
36. Lenin: 1908/mec: 7. A Russian 'Idealist Physicist'
    (www.marxists.org)
37. Lenin: 1908/mec: 8. The Essence and Significance of 'Physical'
    Idealism (www.marxists.org)
38. Lenin: 1908/mec: 1. The Excursions of the German Empirio-Criticists
    Into The Field of the Social Sciences (www.marxists.org)
39. Lenin: 1908/mec: 2. How Bogdanov Corrects and 'Develops' Marx
    (www.marxists.org)
40. Lenin: 1908/mec: 3. Suvorov's 'Foundations Of Social Philosophy'
    (www.marxists.org)
41. Lenin: 1908/mec: 4. Parties in Philosophy and Philosophical
    Blockheads (www.marxists.org)
42. Lenin: 1908/mec: 5. Ernst Haeckel and Ernst Mach (www.marxists.org)
43. Lenin: 1908/mec: Conclusion (www.marxists.org)
44. Lenin: 1908/mec: Supplement to Chapter Four, SECTION I
    (www.marxists.org)
