
Karl Marx 1847



THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY ANSWER TO THE _PHILOSOPHY OF POVERTY_ BY M. PROUDHON


WRITTEN: First half of 1847;
SOURCE: _The Poverty of Philosophy_, by Karl Marx, Progress Publishers,
1955;
FIRST PUBLISHED: in Paris and Brussels, 1847;
TRANSLATED: from the French by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism, 1955;
TRANSCRIBED: by Zodiac for Marx/Engels Internet Archive (marxists.org)
1999;
PROOFED: and corrected by Matthew Carmody, 2009.

In this work Marx critiques the economic (chapter one) and philosophical
(chapter two) doctrine of P. J. Proudhon.
Marx started work on this book in January 1847, as can be judged from
Engels’ letter to Marx on January 15, 1847. By the beginning of April
1847, Marx’s work was completed in the main and had gone to the press.
On June 15, 1847 he wrote a short foreword.

Published in Paris and Brussels in 1847, the book was not republished in
full during Marx’s lifetime. Excerpts from section five of Chapter Two
appeared in different years, mostly between 1872 - 1875 in papers such
as _La Emancipacion_, _Der Volksstaat_, _Social-Demokrat_, and others.
In 1880 Marx attempted to publish the _Poverty of Philosophy_ in the
French socialist newspaper _L’Égalité_, the organ of the French Workers’
Party, but only the foreword and section one of Chapter One were
published.

This translation is from the original 1847 French edition. It has been
updated to also include the changes/corrections Marx made in the copy of
the book he presented to N. Utina in 1876, as well as the corrections
made by Frederick Engels in the second French edition and the German
editions of 1885 and 1892. Twentieth Century Press published the first
English edition of this work in 1900. Note: italics in quotations are as
a rule Marx’s. Also, references added in brackets correspond to the same
edition Marx used.

Foreword

M. Proudhon has the misfortune of being peculiarly misunderstood in
Europe. In France, he has the right to be a bad economist, because he is
reputed to be a good German philosopher. In Germany, he has the right to
be a bad philosopher, because he is reputed to be one of the ablest
French economists. Being both German and economist at the same time, we
desire to protest against this double error.

The reader will understand that in this thankless task we have often had
to abandon our criticism of M. Proudhon in order to criticize German
philosophy, and at the same time to give some observations on political
economy.

Karl Marx Brussels, June 15, 1847

M. Proudhon’s work is not just a treatise on political economy, an
ordinary book; it is a bible. “Mysteries,” “Secrets Wrested from the
Bosom of God,” “Revelations” – it lacks nothing. But as prophets are
discussed nowadays more conscientiously than profane writers, the reader
must resign himself to going with us through the arid and gloomy
eruditions of “Genesis,” in order to ascend later, with M. Proudhon,
into the ethereal and fertile realm of _super-socialism_. (See Proudhon,
_Philosophy of Poverty_, Prologue, p. III, line 20.)

Marx and Rodbertus Preface to the First German Edition by Frederick Engels

Engels’ letters written between August and October 1884 show that he did
a great deal of work in preparing Marx’s _Poverty of Philosophy_ for
publication in German. (The book was written and published in French in
1847 and was not republished in full during Marx’s lifetime.) Engels
edited the translation made by Eduard Bernstein and Karl Kautsky and
supplied a number of notes to it.
The first German edition of Marx’s book appeared in the second half of
January 1885 and, a little earlier, at the beginning of January, Engels
published his Preface in the magazine _Die Neue Zeit_ under the title
“Marx und Rodbertus.” It was also included in the second German edition
of the book which appeared in 1892 with a special preface written by
Engels. – _Editors_.

The present work was produced in the winter of 1846-47, at a time when
Marx had cleared up for himself the basic features of his new historical
and economic outlook. Proudhon’s _Système des contradictions
économiques, ou Philosophie de la misère_, which had just appeared, gave
him the opportunity to develop these basic features, setting them
against the views of a man who, from then on, was to occupy the most
important place among living French socialists. Since the time in Paris
when the two of them had often spent whole nights discussing economic
questions, their paths had increasingly diverged: Proudhon’s book proved
that there was already an unbridgeable gulf between them. To ignore it
was at that time impossible, and so Marx put on record the irreparable
rupture in this reply of his.

Marx’s general opinion of Proudhon is to be found in the article which
appeared in the Berlin _Social-Demokrat_ Nos. 16, 17 and 18 for 1865. It
was the only article Marx wrote for that paper; Herr von Schweitzer’s
attempts to guide it along feudal and government lines, which became
evident soon afterwards, compelled us to publicly terminate our
collaboration after only a few weeks.¹

For Germany, the present work has at this precise moment a significance
which Marx himself never imagined. How could he have known that, in
trouncing Proudhon, he was hitting Rodbertus, the idol of the careerists
of today, who was unknown to him even by name at that time?

This is not the place to deal with relations between Marx and Rodbertus;
an opportunity for that is sure to present itself to me very soon.²
Suffice it to note here that when Rodbertus accuses Marx of having
“plundered” him and of having “freely used in his _Capital_ without
quoting him” his work _Zur Erkenntnis,_ he allows himself to indulge in
an act of slander which is only explicable by the irksomeness of
unrecognised genius and by his remarkable ignorance of things taking
place outside Prussia, and especially of socialist and economic
literature. Neither these charges, nor the above-mentioned work by
Rodbertus ever came to Marx’s sight; all he knew of Rodbertus was the
three _Sociale Briefe_ and even these certainly not before 1858 or 1859.

With greater reason Rodbertus asserts in these letters that he had
already discovered “Proudhon’s constituted value” _before_ Proudhon; but
here again it is true he erroneously flatters himself with being the
_first_ discoverer. In any case, he is thus one of the targets of
criticism in the present work, and this compels me to deal briefly with
his “fundamental” piece: _Zur Erkenntnis unsrer staatswirthschaftlichen
Zustände_, 1842, insofar as this brings forth anticipations of Proudhon
as well as the communism of Weitling likewise (again unconsciously)
contained in it.

Insofar as modern socialism, no matter of what tendency, starts out from
bourgeois political economy, it almost without exception takes up the
Ricardian theory of value. The two propositions which Ricardo proclaimed
in 1817 right at the beginning of his _Principles_,

1) That the value of any commodity is purely and solely determined by
the quantity of labour required for its production, and

2) That the product of the entire social labour is divided among the
three classes: landowners (rent), capitalists (profit) and workers
(wages)

These two propositions had ever since 1821 been utilised in England for
socialist conclusions³, and in part with such pointedness and resolution
that this literature, which had then almost been forgotten and was to a
large extent only rediscovered by Marx, remained unsurpassed until the
appearance of _Capital._ About this another time. If, therefore, in 1842
Rodbertus for his part drew socialist conclusions from the above
propositions, that was certainly a very considerable step forward for a
German at that time, but it could rank as a new discovery only for
Germany at best. That such an application of the Ricardian theory was
far from new was proved by Marx against Proudhon, who suffered from a
similar conceit.

“Anyone who is in any way familiar with the trend of political economy
in England cannot fail to know that almost all the socialists in that
country have, at different periods, proposed the _equalitarian_ (i.e.
socialist) application of Ricardian theory. We could quote for M.
Proudhon: Hodgskin, _Political Economy_, 1827; William Thompson, _An
Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth Most Conducive
to Human Happiness_, 1824; T. R. Edmonds, _Practical Moral and Political
Economy_, 1828, etc., etc., and four pages more of etc. We shall content
ourselves with listening to an English Communist, Mr. Bray ... in his
remarkable work, _Labour’s Wrongs and Labour’s Remedy_, Leeds, 1839.”

And the quotations given here from Bray on their own put an end to a
good part of the priority claimed by Rodbertus.

At that time Marx had never yet entered the reading room of the British
Museum. Apart from the libraries of Paris and Brussels, apart from my
books and extracts, he had only examined such books as were obtainable
in Manchester during a six-week journey to England we made together in
the summer of 1845. The literature in question was, therefore, by no
means so inaccessible in the forties as it may be now. If, all the same,
it always remained unknown to Rodbertus, that is to be ascribed solely
to his Prussian local bigotry. He is the actual founder of specifically
Prussian socialism and is now at last recognised as such.

However, even in his beloved Prussia, Rodbertus was not to remain
undisturbed. In 1859, Marx’s _A Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy_, Part I, was published in Berlin. Therein, among the
economists’ objections to Ricardo, the following was put forward as the
second objection (p. 40):

“If the exchange value of a product equals the labour time contained in
the product, then the exchange value of a working day is equal to the
product it yields, in other words, wages must be equal to the product of
labour. But in fact the opposite is true.”

On this there was the following note:

“This objection, which was advanced against Ricardo by economists, was
later taken up by socialists. Assuming that the formula was
theoretically sound, they alleged that practice stood in conflict with
the theory and demanded that bourgeois society should draw the practical
conclusions supposedly arising from its theoretical principles. In this
way at least English socialists turned Ricardo’s formula of exchange
value against political economy.”

In the same note there was a reference to Marx’s _Misère de la
philosophie_, which was then obtainable in all the bookshops.

Rodbertus, therefore, had sufficient opportunity of convincing himself
whether his discoveries of 1842 were really new. Instead he proclaims
them again and again and regards them as so incomparable that it never
occurs to him that Marx might have drawn his conclusions from Ricardo
independently, just as well as Rodbertus himself. Absolutely impossible!
Marx had “plundered” him – the man whom the same Marx had offered every
opportunity to convince himself how long before both of them these
conclusions, at least in the crude form which they still have in the
case of Rodbertus, had previously been enunciated in England!

The simplest socialist application of the Ricardian theory is indeed
that given above. It has led in many cases to insights into the origin
and nature of surplus value which go far beyond Ricardo, as in the case
of Rodbertus among others. Quite apart from the fact that on this matter
he nowhere presents anything which has not already been said at least as
well, before him, his presentation suffers like those of his
predecessors from the fact that he adopts, uncritically and without
examining their content, economic categories – labour, capital, value,
etc. – in the crude form, clinging to their external appearance, in
which they were handed down to him by the economists. He thereby not
only cuts himself off from all further development – in contrast to Marx
who was the first to make something of these propositions so often
repeated for the last sixty-four years – but, as will be shown, he opens
for himself the road leading straight to utopia.

The above application of the Ricardian theory that the entire social
product belongs to the workers as _their_ product, because they are the
sole real producers, leads directly to communism. But, as Marx indeed
indicates in the above-quoted passage, it is incorrect in formal
economic terms, for it is simply an application of morality to
economics. According to the laws of bourgeois economics, the greatest
part of the product does _not_ belong to the workers who have produced
it. If we now say: that is unjust, that ought not to be so, then that
has nothing immediately to do with economics. We are merely saying that
this economic fact is in contradiction to our sense of morality. Marx,
therefore, never based his communist demands upon this, but upon the
inevitable collapse of the capitalist mode of production which is daily
taking place before our eyes to an ever growing degree; he says only
that surplus value consists of unpaid labour, which is a simple fact.
But what in economic terms may be formally incorrect, may all the same
be correct from the point of view of world history. If mass moral
consciousness declares an economic fact to be unjust, as it did at one
time in the case of slavery and statute labour, that is proof that the
fact itself has outlived its day, that other economic facts have made
their appearance due to which the former has become unbearable and
untenable. Therefore, a very true economic content may be concealed
behind the formal economic incorrectness. This is not the place to deal
more closely with the significance and history of the theory of surplus
value.

At the same time other conclusions can be drawn, and have been drawn,
from the Ricardian theory of value. The value of commodities is
determined by the labour required for their production. But now it turns
out that in this imperfect world commodities are sold sometimes above,
sometimes below their value, and indeed not only as a result of ups and
downs in competition. The rate of profit tends just as much to balance
out at the same level for all capitalists as the price of commodities
does to become reduced to the labour value by agency of supply and
demand. But the rate of profit is calculated on the total capital
invested in an industrial business. Since now the annual products in two
different branches of industry may incorporate equal quantities of
labour, and, consequently, may represent equal values and also wages may
be at an equal level in both, while the capital advanced in one branch
may be, and often is, twice or three times as great as in the other,
consequently the Ricardian law of value, as Ricardo himself discovered,
comes into contradiction here with the law of the equal rate of profit.
If the products of both branches of industry are sold at their values,
the rates of profit cannot be equal; if, however, the rates of profit
are equal, then the products of the two branches of industry cannot
always be sold at their values. Thus, we have here a contradiction, the
antinomy of two economic laws, the practical resolution of which takes
place according to Ricardo (Chapter I, Section 4 and 5⁴) as a rule in
favour of the rate of profit at the cost of value.

But the Ricardian definition of value, in spite of its ominous
characteristics, has a feature which makes it dear to the heart of the
honest bourgeois. It appeals with irresistible force to his sense of
justice. Justice and equality of rights are the cornerstones on which
the bourgeois of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries would like to
erect his social edifice over the ruins of feudal injustice, inequality
and privilege. And the determination of value of commodities by labour
and the free exchange of the products of labour, taking place according
to this measure of value between commodity owners with equal rights,
these are, as Marx has already proved, the real foundations on which the
whole political, juridical and philosophical ideology of the modern
bourgeoisie has been built. Once it is recognised that labour is the
measure of value of a commodity, the better feelings of the honest
bourgeois cannot but be deeply wounded by the wickedness of a world
which, while recognising the basic law of justice in name, still in fact
appears at every moment to set it aside without compunction. And the
petty bourgeois especially, whose honest labour – even if it is only
that of his workmen and apprentices – is daily more and more depreciated
in value by the competition of large-scale production and machinery,
this small-scale producer especially must long for a society in which
the exchange of products according to their labour value is at last a
complete and invariable truth. In other words, he must long for a
society in which a single law of commodity production prevails
exclusively and in full, but in which the conditions are abolished in
which it can prevail at all, viz., the other laws of commodity
production and, later, of capitalist production.

How deeply this utopia has struck roots in the way of thinking of the
modern petty bourgeois – real or ideal – is proved by the fact that it
was systematically developed by John Gray back in 1831, that it was
tried in practice and theoretically propagated in England in the
thirties, that it was proclaimed as the latest truth by Rodbertus in
Germany in 1842 and by Proudhon in France in 1846, that it was again
proclaimed by Rodbertus as late as 1871 as the solution to the social
question and, as, so to say, his social testament, and that in 1884 it
again finds adherents among the horde of careerists who in the name of
Rodbertus set out to exploit Prussian state socialism.⁵

The critique of this utopia has been so exhaustively furnished by Marx
both against Proudhon and against Gray (see the appendix to this work)
that I can confine myself here to a few remarks on the form of
substantiating and depicting it peculiar to Rodbertus.

As already noted, Rodbertus adopts the traditional definitions of
economic concepts entirely in the form in which they have come down to
him from the economists. He does not make the slightest attempt to
investigate them. Value is for him

“the valuation of one thing against others according to quantity, this
valuation being conceived as measure”

This, to put it mildly, extremely slovenly definition gives us at the
best an idea of what value approximately looks like, but says absolutely
nothing of what it is. Since this, however, is all that Rodbertus is
able to tell us about value, it is understandable that he looks for a
measure of value located outside value. After thirty pages in which he
mixes up use value and exchange value in higgledy-piggledy fashion with
that power of abstract thought so infinitely admired by Herr Adolf
Wagner,⁶ he arrives at the conclusion that there is no real measure of
value and that one has to make do with a substitute measure. Labour
could serve as such but only if products of an equal quantity of labour
were always exchanged against products of an equal quantity of labour
whether this “is already the case of itself, or whether precautionary
measures are adopted” to ensure that it is. Consequently value and
labour remain without any sort of material connection in spite of the
fact that the whole first chapter is taken up to expound to us that
commodities “cost labour” and nothing but labour, and why this is so.

Labour, again, is taken uncritically in the form in which it occurs
among the economists. And not even that. For, although there is a
reference in a couple of words to differences in intensity of labour,
labour is still put forward quite generally as something which “costs,”
hence as something which measures value, quite irrespective of whether
it is expended under normal average social conditions or not. Whether
the producers take ten days, or only one, to make products which could
be made in one day; whether they employ the best or the worst tools;
whether they expend their labour time in the production of socially
necessary articles and in the socially required quantity, or whether
they make quite undesired articles or desired articles in quantities
above or below demand – about all this there is not a word: labour is
labour, the product of equal labour must be exchanged against the
product of equal labour. Rodbertus, who is otherwise always ready,
whether rightly or not, to adopt the national standpoint and to survey
the relations of individual producers from the high watchtower of
general social considerations, is anxious to avoid doing so here. And
this, indeed, solely because from the very first line of his book he
makes directly for the utopia of labour money, and because any
investigation of labour seen from its property of creating value would
be bound to put insuperable obstacles in his way. His instinct was here
considerably stronger than his power of abstract thought which, by the
by, is revealed in Rodbertus only by the most concrete absence of ideas.

The transition to utopia is now made in the turn of a hand. The
“measures,” which ensure exchange of commodities according to labour
value as the invariable rule, cause no difficulty. The other utopians of
this tendency, from Gray to Proudhon, rack their brains to invent social
institutions which would achieve this aim. They attempt at least to
solve the economic question in an economic way through the action of the
owners themselves who exchange the commodities. For Rodbertus it is much
easier. As a good Prussian he appeals to the state: a decree of the
state authority orders the reform.

In this way then, value is happily “constituted,” but by no means the
priority in this constitution as claimed by Rodbertus. On the contrary,
Gray as well as Bray – among many others – before Rodbertus, at length
and frequently _ad nauseam_, repeated this idea, viz. the pious desire
for measures by means of which products would always and under all
circumstances be exchanged only at their labour value.

After the state has thus constituted value – at least for a part of the
products, for Rodbertus is also modest – it issues its labour paper
money, and gives advances therefrom to the industrial capitalists, with
which the latter pay the workers, whereupon the workers buy the products
with the labour paper money they have received, and so cause the paper
money to flow back to its starting point. How very beautifully this is
effected, one must hear from Rodbertus himself:

“In regard to the second condition, the necessary measure that the value
certified in the note should be actually present in circulation is
realised in that only the person who actually delivers a product
receives a note, on which is accurately recorded the quantity of labour
by which the product was produced, Whoever delivers a product of two
days’ labour receives a note marked ‘two days’. By the strict observance
of this rule in the issue of notes, the second condition too would
necessarily be fulfilled. For according to our supposition the real
value of the goods always coincides with the quantity of labour which
their production has cost and this quantity of labour is measured by the
usual units of time, and therefore someone who hands in a product on
which two days’ labour has been expended and receives a certificate for
two days, has received, certified or assigned to him neither more nor
less value than that which he has in fact supplied. Further, since
_only_ the person who has actually put a product into circulation
receives such a certificate, it is also certain that the value marked on
the note is available for the satisfaction of society. However extensive
we imagine the circle of division of labour to be, if this rule is
strictly followed _the sum total of available value_ must _be exactly
equal to the sum total of certified value._ Since, however, the sum
total of certified value is exactly equal to the sum total of value
assigned, the latter must _necessarily coincide with the available
value, all claims will be satisfied and the liquidation correctly
brought about_” (pp. 166-67).

If Rodbertus has hitherto always had the misfortune to arrive too late
with his new discoveries, this time at least he has the merit of _one_
sort of originality: none of his rivals has dared to express the
stupidity of the labour money utopia in this childishly naive,
transparent, I might say truly Pomeranian, form. Since for every paper
certificate a corresponding object of value has been delivered, and no
object of value is supplied except in return for a corresponding paper
certificate, the sum total of paper certificates must always be covered
by the sum total of objects of value. The calculation works out without
the smallest remainder, it is correct down to a second of labour time,
and no governmental chief revenue office accountant, however many years
of faithful service he may have behind him, could prove the slightest
error in calculation. What more could one want?

In present-day capitalist society each industrial capitalist produces
off his own bat what, how and as much as he likes. The social demand,
however, remains an unknown magnitude to him, both in regard to quality,
the kind of objects required, and in regard to quantity. That which
today cannot be supplied quickly enough, may tomorrow be offered far in
excess of the demand. Nevertheless, demand is finally satisfied in one
way or another, good or bad, and, taken as a whole, production is
ultimately geared towards the objects required. How is this evening-out
of the contradiction effected? By competition. And how does competition
bring about this solution? Simply by depreciating below their labour
value those commodities which by their kind or amount are useless for
immediate social requirements, and by making the producers feel, through
this roundabout means, that they have produced either absolutely useless
articles or ostensibly useful articles in unusable, superfluous
quantity. Two things follow from this:

First, continual deviations of the prices of commodities from their
values are the necessary condition in and through which the value of the
commodities as such can come into existence. Only through the
fluctuations of competition, and consequently of commodity prices, does
the law of value of commodity production assert itself and the
determination of the value of the commodity by the socially necessary
labour time become a reality. That thereby the form of manifestation of
value, the price, as a rule looks somewhat different from the value
which it manifests, is a fate which value shares with most social
relations. A king usually looks quite different from the monarchy which
he represents. To desire, in a society of producers who exchange their
commodities, to establish the determination of value by labour time, by
forbidding competition to establish this determination of value through
pressure on prices in the only way it can be established, is therefore
merely to prove that, at least in this sphere, one has adopted the usual
utopian disdain of economic laws.

Secondly, competition, by bringing into operation the law of value of
commodity production in a society of producers who exchange their
commodities, precisely thereby brings about the only organisation and
arrangement of social production which is possible in the circumstances.
Only through the undervaluation or overvaluation of products is it
forcibly brought home to the individual commodity producers what society
requires or does not require and in what amounts. But it is precisely
this sole regulator that the utopia advocated by Rodbertus among others
wishes to abolish. And if we then ask what guarantee we have that
necessary quantity and not more of each product will be produced, that
we shall not go hungry in regard to corn and meat while we are choked in
beet sugar and drowned in potato spirit, that we shall not lack trousers
to cover our nakedness while trouser buttons flood us by the million –
Rodbertus triumphantly shows us his splendid calculation, according to
which the correct certificate has been handed out for every superfluous
pound of sugar, for every unsold barrel of spirit, for every unusable
trouser button, a calculation which “works out” exactly, and according
to which “all claims will be satisfied and the liquidation correctly
brought about.” And anyone who does not believe this can apply to
governmental chief revenue office accountant X in Pomerania who has
checked the calculation and found it correct, and who, as one who has
never yet been caught lacking with the accounts, is thoroughly
trustworthy.

And now consider the naiveté with which Rodbertus would abolish
industrial and commercial crises by means of his utopia. As soon as the
production of commodities has assumed world market dimensions, the
evening-out between the individual producers who produce for private
account and the market for which they produce, which in respect of
quantity and quality of demand is more or less unknown to them, is
established by means of a storm on the world market, by a commercial
crisis.[1] If now competition is to be forbidden to make the individual
producers aware, by a rise or fall in prices, how the world market
stands, then they are completely blindfolded. To institute the
production of commodities in such a fashion that the producers can no
longer learn anything about the state of the market for which they are
producing – that indeed is a cure for the crisis disease which could
make Dr. Eisenbart envious of Rodbertus.

It is now comprehensible why Rodbertus determines the value of
commodities simply by “labour” and at most allows for different degrees
of intensity of labour. If he had investigated by what means and how
labour creates value and therefore also determines and measures it, he
would have arrived at socially necessary labour, necessary for the
individual product, both in relation to other products of the same kind
and also in relation to society’s total demand. He would thereby have
been confronted with the question as to how the adjustment of the
production of separate commodity producers to the total social demand
takes place, and his whole utopia would thereby have been made
impossible. This time he preferred in fact to “make an abstraction,”
namely of precisely that which mattered.

Now at last we come to the point where Rodbertus really offers us
something new; something which distinguishes him from all his numerous
fellow supporters of the labour money exchange economy. They all demand
this exchange organisation for the purpose of abolishing the
exploitation of wage labour by capital. Every producer is to receive the
full labour value of his product. On this they all agree, from Gray to
Proudhon. Not at all, says Rodbertus. Wage labour and its exploitation
remain.

In the first place, in no conceivable condition of society can the
worker receive the full value of his product for consumption. A series
of economically unproductive but necessary functions have to be met from
the fund produced, and consequently also the persons connected with them
maintained. This is only correct so long as the present-day division of
labour applies. In a society in which general productive labour is
obligatory, which is also “conceivable” after all, this ceases to apply.
But the need for a social reserve and accumulation fund would remain and
consequently even in that case, the workers, i.e., _all_, would remain
in possession and enjoyment of their total product, but each separate
worker would not enjoy the “full returns of his labour.” Nor has the
maintenance of economically unproductive functions at the expense of the
labour product been overlooked by the other labour money utopians. But
they leave the workers to tax themselves for this purpose in the usual
democratic way, while Rodbertus, whose whole social reform of 1842 is
geared to the Prussian state of that time, refers the whole matter to
the decision of the bureaucracy, which determines from above the share
of the worker in his own product and graciously permits him to have it.

In the second place, however, rent and profit are also to continue
undiminished. For the landowners and industrial capitalists also
exercise certain socially useful or even necessary functions, even if
economically unproductive ones, and they receive in the shape of rent
and profit a sort of pay on that account – a conception which was, it
will be recalled, not new even in 1842. Actually they get at present far
too much for the little that they do, and badly at that, but Rodbertus
has need, at least for the next five hundred years, of a privileged
class, and so the present rate of surplus value, to express myself
correctly, is to remain in existence but is not to be allowed to be
increased. This present rate of surplus value Rodbertus takes to be 200
per cent, that is to say, for twelve hours of labour daily the worker is
to receive a certificate not for twelve hours but only for four, and the
value produced in the remaining eight hours is to be divided between
landowner and capitalist. Rodbertus’ labour certificates, therefore, are
a direct lie. Again, one must be a Pomeranian manor owner in order to
imagine that a working class would put up with working twelve hours in
order to receive a certificate for four hours of labour. If the
hocus-pocus of capitalist production is translated into this naïve
language, in which it appears as naked robbery, it is made impossible.
Every certificate given to a worker would be a direct instigation to
rebellion and would come under § 110 of the German Imperial Criminal
Code.⁷ One need never have seen any other proletariat than the
day-labourer proletariat, still actually in semi-serfdom, of a
Pomeranian manor where the rod and the whip reign supreme, and where all
the beautiful women in the village belong to his lordship’s harem, in
order to imagine one can treat the workers in such a shamefaced manner.
But, after all, our conservatives are our greatest revolutionaries.

If, however, our workers are sufficiently docile to be taken in that
they have in reality only worked four hours during a whole twelve hours
of hard work, they are, as a reward, to be guaranteed that for all
eternity their share in their own product will never fall below a third.
That is indeed pie in the sky of the most infantile kind and not worth
wasting a word over. Insofar, therefore, as there is anything novel in
the labour money exchange utopia of Rodbertus, this novelty is simply
childish and far below the achievements of his numerous comrades both
before and after him.

For the time when Rodbertus’ _Zur Erkenntnis_, etc., appeared, it was
certainly an important book. His development of Ricardo’s theory of
value in that one direction was a very promising beginning. Even if it
was new only for him and for Germany, still as a whole, it stands on a
par with the achievements of the better ones among his English
predecessors. But it was only a beginning, from which a real gain for
theory could be achieved only by further thorough and critical work. But
he cut himself off from further development by also tackling the
development of Ricardo’s theory from the very beginning in the second
direction, in the direction of utopia. Thereby he surrendered the first
condition of all criticism – freedom from bias. He worked on towards a
goal fixed in advance, he became a _Tendenzökonom._ Once imprisoned by
his utopia, he cut himself off from all possibility of scientific
advance. From 1842 up to his death, he went round in circles, always
repeating the same ideas which he had already expressed or suggested in
his first work, feeling himself unappreciated, finding himself
plundered, where there was nothing to plunder, and finally refusing, not
without intention, to recognise that in essence he had only rediscovered
what had already been discovered long before.

In a few places the translation departs from the printed French
original. This is due to handwritten alterations by Marx, which will
also be inserted in the new French edition that is now being prepared.⁸

It is hardly necessary to point out that the terminology used in this
work does not entirely coincide with that in _Capital._ Thus this work
still speaks of _labour_ as a commodity, of the purchase and sale of
labour, instead of labour _power._

Also added as a supplement to this edition are:

1) A passage from Marx’s work _A Contribution to the Critique of
Political Economy_, Berlin, 1859, dealing with the _first_ labour money
exchange utopia of John Gray, and

2) A translation of Marx’s speech on free trade in Brussels (1848),
which belongs to the same period of the author’s development as the
_Misère._

London, October 23, 1884 Frederick Engels

Engels’ 1892 Introduction

For the second edition I have only to remark that the name wrongly
written Hopkins in the French text (on page 45) has been replaced by the
correct name Hodgskin and that in the same place the date of the work of
William Thompson has been corrected to 1824. It is to be hoped that this
will appease the bibliographical conscience of Professor Anton Menger.

Frederick Engels London, March 29, 1892

NOTES

1. Marx wrote the statement about the break with _Der Social-Demokrat_
on February 18, 1865 and sent it to Engels, who fully endorsed it and
returned it to Marx with his signature; on February 23, 1865 Marx sent
the statement to the editors of the newspaper. This was occasioned by
Schweitzer’s series of articles _Das Ministerium Bismarck_ in which he
expressed overt support for Bismarck’s policy of unifying Germany under
Prussian supremacy. Marx took measures to make Schweitzer publish the
statement. It was published in many papers, among them the _Barmer
Zeitung_ and _Elberfelder Zeitung_ on February 26. Schweitzer was forced
to publish this statement in _Der Social Demokrat_, No. 29, March 3,
1865.

2. The reference is to Engels’ Preface to the first German edition of
Vol. II of Marx’s _Capital_, which Engels completed on May 5, 1885.

3. See the anonymous pamphlet: The Source and Remedy of the National
Difficulties, deduced from principles of political economy, in a letter
to Lord John Russell, London, 1821.

For more details about the pamphlet see Engels’ Preface to Vol. II of
Marx’s Capital.

4. Engels is referring to the second edition of Ricardo’s book On the
Principles of Political Economy, and Taxation, London, 1819, pp. 32-46,
where the author divided the text into sections.

5. The reference is to the people who took part in publishing the
literary legacy of Rodbertus-Jagetzow, in particular his work Das
Kapital. Vierter socialer Brief an von Kirchmann, Berlin, 1884; the
publisher of this work and the author of the introduction to it was
Theophil Kozak; the preface was written by the German vulgar economist
Adolf Wagner.

6. Engels is referring to the preface to K. Rodbertus-Jagetzow’s work,
Das Kapital. Vierter socialer Brief an von Kirchmann, Berlin, 1884, pp.
VII-VIII, in which Adolf Wagner wrote: “Rodbertus evinces here such a
power of abstract thinking as is possessed only by the greatest
masters.”

7. § 110 of the German Imperial Criminal Code promulgated in 1871
stipulated a fine of up to 600 marks or imprisonment for a term of up to
2 years for a public appeal in writing to disobey the laws and decrees
operating in the German Empire.

8. The second French edition of The Poverty of Philosophy, which was
being prepared by Marx’s daughter Laura Lafargue, appeared in Paris only
after Engels’ death, in 1896.


Chapter One: A Scientific Discovery

§ 1. The Antithesis of Use Value and Exchange Value

 ”The capacity for all products, whether natural or industrial, to
contribute to man’s subsistence is specifically termed use value; their
capacity to be given in exchange for one another, exchange value.... How
does use value become exchange value?... The genesis of the idea of
(exchange) value has not been noted by economists with sufficient care.
It is necessary, therefore, for us to dwell upon it. Since a very large
number of the things I need occur in nature only in moderate quantities,
or even not at all, I am forced to assist in the production of what I
lack. And as I cannot set my hand to so many things, I shall propose to
other men, my collaborators in various functions, to cede to me a part
of their products in exchange for mine.” (Proudhon, Vol. I, Chap. II)

M. Proudhon undertakes to explain to us first of all the double nature
of value, the “distinction in value,” the process by which use value is
transformed into exchange value. It is necessary for us to dwell with M.
Proudhon upon this act of transubstantiation. The following is how this
act is accomplished, according to our author.

A very large number of products are not to be found in nature, they are
products of industry. If man’s needs go beyond nature’s spontaneous
production, he is forced to have recourse to industrial production. What
is this industry in M. Proudhon’s view? What is its origin? A single
individual, feeling the need for a very great number of things, “cannot
set his hand to so many things.” So many things to produce presuppose at
once more than one man’s hand helping to produce them. Now, the moment
you postulate more than one hand helping in production, you at once
presuppose a whole production based on the division of labour. Thus
need, as M. Proudhon presupposes it, itself presupposes the whole
division of labour. In presupposing the division of labour, you get
exchange, and, consequently, exchange value. One might as well have
presupposed exchange value from the very beginning.

But M. Proudhon prefers to go the roundabout way. Let us follow him in
all his detours, which always bring him back to his starting point.

In order to emerge from the condition in which everyone produces in
isolation and to arrive at exchange, “I turn to my collaborators in
various functions,” says M. Proudhon. I, myself, then, have
collaborators, all with different function. And yet, for all that, I and
all the others, always according to M. Proudhon’s supposition, have got
no farther than the solitary and hardly social position of the
Robinsons. The collaborators and the various functions, the division of
labour and the exchange it implies, are already at hand.

To sum up: I have certain needs which are founded on the division of
labour and on exchange. In presupposing these needs, M. Proudhon has
thus presupposed exchange, exchange value, the very thing of which he
purposes to “note the genesis with more care than other economists.”

M. Proudhon might just as well have inverted the order of things,
without in any way affecting the accuracy of his conclusions. To explain
exchange value, we must have exchange. To explain exchange, we must have
the division of labour. To explain the division of labour, we must have
needs which render necessary the division of labour. To explain these
needs, we must “presuppose” them, which is not to deny them – contrary
to the first axiom in M. Proudhon’s prologue: “To presuppose God is to
deny him.” (Prologue, p. 1)

How does M. Proudhon, who assumes the division of labour as the known,
manage to explain exchange value, which for him is always the unknown?

“A man” sets out to “_propose_ to other men, his collaborators in
various functions,” that they establish exchange, and make a distinction
between ordinary value and exchange value. In accepting this proposed
distinction, the collaborators have left M. Proudhon no other “care”
than that of recording the fact, or marking, of “noting” in his treatise
on political economy “the genesis of the idea of value.” But he has
still to explain to us the “genesis” of this proposal, to tell us
finally how this single individual, this Robinson [Crusoe], suddenly had
the idea of making “to his collaborators” a proposal of the type known
and how these collaborators accepted it without the slightest protest.

M. Proudhon does not enter into these genealogical details. He merely
places a sort of historical stamp upon the fact of exchange, by
presenting it in the form of a motion, made by a third party, that
exchange be established.

That is a sample of the “historical and descriptive method” of M.
Proudhon, who professes a superb disdain for the “historical and
descriptive methods” of the Adam Smiths and Ricardos.

Exchange has a history of its own. It has passed through different
phases. There was a time, as in the Middle Ages, when only the
superfluous, the excess of production over consumption, was exchanged.

There was again a time, when not only the superfluous, but all products,
all industrial existence, had passed into commerce, when the whole of
production depended on exchange. How are we to explain this second phase
of exchange – marketable value at its second power?

M. Proudhon would have a reply ready-made: Assume that a man has
“_proposed_ to other men, his collaborators in various functions,” to
raise marketable value to its second power.

Finally, there came a time when everything that men had considered as
inalienable became an object of exchange, of traffic and could be
alienated. This is the time when the very things which till then had
been communicated, but never exchanged; given, but never sold; acquired,
but never bought – virtue, love, conviction, knowledge, conscience, etc.
– when everything, in short, passed into commerce. It is the time of
general corruption, of universal venality, or, to speak in terms of
political economy, the time when everything, moral or physical, having
become a marketable value, is brought to the market to be assessed at
its truest value.

How, again, can we explain this new and last phase of exchange –
marketable value at its third power?

M. Proudhon would have a reply ready-made: Assume that a person has
“_proposed_ to other persons, his collaborators in various functions,”
to make a marketable value out of virtue, love, etc., to raise exchange
value to its third and last power.

We see that M. Proudhon’s “historical and descriptive method” is
applicable to everything, it answers everything, explains everything. If
it is a question above all of explaining historically “the genesis of an
economic idea,” it postulates a man who proposes to other men, “his
collaborators in various functions,” that they perform this act of
genesis and that is the end of it.

We shall hereafter accept the “genesis” of exchange value as an
accomplished act; it now remains only to expound the relation between
exchange value and use value. Let us hear what M. Proudhon has to say:

“Economists have very well brought out the double character of value,
but why they have not pointed out with the same precision is its
contradictory nature; there is where our criticism begins.... It is a
small thing to have drawn attention to this surprising contrast between
use value and exchange value, in which economists have been wont to see
only something very simple: we must show that this alleged simplicity
conceals a profound mystery into which it is our duty to penetrate....
In technical terms, use value and exchange value stand in inverse ratio
to each other.”

If we have thoroughly grasped M. Proudhon’s thought the following are
the four points which he sets out to establish:

1. Use value and exchange value form a “surprising contrast,” they are
in opposition to each other.

2. Use value and exchange value are in inverse ratio, in contradiction,
to each other.

3. Economists have neither observed nor recognised either the opposition
or the contradiction.

4. M. Proudhon’s criticism begins at the end.

We, too, shall begin at the end, and, in order to clear the economists
from M. Proudhon’s accusations, we shall let two sufficiently well-known
economists speak for themselves.

SISMONDI: “It is the opposition between use value and exchange value to
which commerce has reduced everything, etc.” (Etudes, Volume II, p. 162,
Brussels edition)

LAUDERDALE: “In proportion as the riches of individuals are increased by
an augmentation of the value of any commodity, the wealth of the society
is generally diminished; and in proportion as the mass of individual
riches is diminished, by the diminution of the value of any commodity,
its opulence is generally increased.” (Recherches sur la nature et
l’origine de la richesse publique, translated by Langentie de Lavaisse,
Paris, 1808 [p. 33])

Sismondi founded on the opposition between use value and exchange value
his principal doctrine, according to which diminution in revenue is
proportional to the increase in production.

Lauderdale founded his system on the inverse ratio of the two kinds of
value, and his doctrine was indeed so popular in Ricardo’s time that the
latter could speak of it as of something generally known.

“It is through confounding the ideas of value and wealth, or riches that
it has been asserted, that by diminishing the quantity of commodities,
that is to say, of the necessaries, conveniences, and enjoyments of
human life, riches may be increased.” (Ricardo, Des Principles de
l’économie politique, translated by F. S. Constancio, annotations by J.
B. Say, Paris 1835, Volume II, Chapter “Sur la valeur et les
richesses.”)

We have just seen that the economists before M. Proudhon had “drawn
attention” to the profound mystery of opposition and contradiction. Let
us now see how M. Proudhon explains this mystery after the economists.

The exchange value of a product falls as the supply increases, the
demand remaining the same; in other words, the more abundant a product
is relatively to the demand, the lower is its exchange value, or price.
Vice versa: The weaker the supply relatively to the demand, the higher
rises the exchange value or the price of the product supplied: in other
words, the greater the scarcity in the products supplied, relatively to
the demand, the higher the prices. The exchange value of a product
depends upon its abundance or its scarcity; but always in relation to
the demand. Take a product that is more than scarce, unique of its kind
if you will: this unique product will be more than abundant, it will be
superfluous, if there is no demand for it. On the other hand, take a
product multiplied into millions, it will always be scarce if it does
not satisfy the demand, that is, if there is too great a demand for it.

These are what we should almost call truisms, yet we have had to repeat
them here in order to render M. Proudhon’s mysteries comprehensible.

“So that, following up the principle to its ultimate consequences, one
would come to the conclusion, the most logical in the world, that the
things whose use is indispensable and whose quantity is unlimited should
be had for nothing, and those whose utility is nil and whose scarcity is
extreme should be of incalculable worth. To cap the difficulty, these
extremes are impossible in practice: on the one hand, no human product
could ever be unlimited in magnitude; on the other, even the scarcest
things must perforce be useful to a certain degree, otherwise they would
be quite valueless. Use value and exchange value are thus inexorably
bound up with each other, although by their nature they continually tend
to be mutually exclusive.” (Volume I, p. 39)

What caps M. Proudhon’s difficulty? That he has simply forgotten about
demand, and that a thing can be scarce or abundant only in so far as it
is in demand. The moment he leaves out demand, he identifies exchange
value with scarcity and use value with abundance. In reality, in saying
that things “whose utility is nil and scarcity extreme are of
incalculable worth,” he is simply declaring that exchange value is
merely scarcity. “Scarcity extreme and utility nil” means pure scarcity.
“Incalculable worth” is the maximum of exchange value, it is pure
exchange value. He equates these two terms. Therefore exchange value and
scarcity are equivalent terms. In arriving at these alleged “extreme
consequences,” M. Proudhon has in fact carried to the extreme, not the
things, but the terms which express them, and, in so doing, he shows
proficiency in rhetoric rather than in logic. He merely rediscovers his
first hypotheses in all their nakedness, when he thinks he has
discovered new consequences. Thanks to the same procedure he succeeds in
identifying use value with pure abundance.

After having equated exchange value and scarcity, use value and
abundance, M. Proudhon is quite astonished not to find use value in
scarcity and exchange value, nor exchange value in abundance and use
value; and seeing that these extremes are impossible in practice, he can
do nothing but believe in mystery. Incalculable worth exists for him,
because buyers do not exist, and he will never find any buyers, so long
as he leaves out demand.

On the other hand, M. Proudhon’s abundance seems to be something
spontaneous. He completely forgets that there are people who produce it,
and that it is to their interest never to lose sight of demand.
Otherwise, how could M. Proudhon have said that things which are very
useful must have a very low price, or even cost nothing? On the
contrary, he should have concluded that abundance, the production of
very useful things, should be restricted if their price, their exchange
value is to be raised.

The old vine-growers of France in petitioning for a law to forbid the
planting of new vines; the Dutch in burning Asiatic spices, in uprooting
clove trees in the Moluccas, were simply trying to reduce abundance in
order to raise exchange value. During the whole of the Middle Ages this
same principle was acted upon, in limiting by laws the number of
journeymen a single master could employ and the number of implements he
could use. (See Anderson, History of Commerce.) [A. Anderson, An
Historical and Chronological Deduction of the Origin of Commerce from
the Earliest Accounts to the Present Time. First edition appeared in
London in 1764. p. 33]

After having represented abundance as use value and scarcity as exchange
value – nothing indeed is easier than to prove that abundance and
scarcity are in inverse ratio – M. Proudhon identifies use value with
supply and exchange value with demand. To make the antithesis even more
clear-cut, he substitutes a new term, putting “estimation value” instead
of exchange value. The battle has now shifted its ground, and we have on
one side utility (use value, supply), on the other side, estimation
(exchange value, demand).

Who is to reconcile these two contradictory forces? What is to be done
to bring them into harmony with each other? Is it possible to find in
them even a single point of comparison?

“Certainly,” cries M. Proudhon, “there is one – free will. The price
resulting from this battle between supply and demand, between utility
and estimation will not be the expression of eternal justice.”

M. Proudhon goes on to develop this antithesis.

“In my capacity as a _free_ buyer, I am judge of my needs, judge of the
desirability of an object, judge of the price I am _willing_ to pay for
it. On the other hand, in your capacity as a free producer, you are
master of the _means of execution_, and in consequence, you have the
power to reduce your expenses.” (Volume I, p. 41)

And as demand, or exchange value, is identical with estimation, M.
Proudhon is led to say:

“It is proved that it is man’s free will that gives rise to the
opposition between use value and exchange value. How can this opposition
be removed, so long as free will exists? And how can the latter be
sacrificed without sacrificing mankind?” (Volume I, p. 41)

Thus there is no possible way out. There is a struggle between two as it
were incommensurable powers, between utility and estimation, between the
free buyer and the free producer.

Let us look at things a little more closely.

Supply does not represent exclusively utility, demand does not represent
exclusively estimation. Does not the demander also supply a certain
product or the token representing all products – viz., money; and as
supplier, does he not represent, according to M. Proudhon, utility or
use value?

Again, does not the supplier also demand a certain product or the token
representing all products – viz., money? And does he not thus become the
representative of estimation, of estimation value or of exchange value?

Demand is at the same time a supply, supply is at the same time a
demand. Thus M. Proudhon’s antithesis, in simply identifying supply and
demand, the one with utility, the other with estimation, is based only
on a futile abstraction.

What M. Proudhon calls use value is called estimation value by other
economists, and with just as much right. We shall quote only Storch
(Cours d’économie politique, Paris 1823, pp. 48 and 49).

According to him, needs are the things for which we feel the need;
values are things to which we attribute value. Most things have value
only because they satisfy needs engendered by estimation. The estimation
of our needs may change; therefore the utility of things, which
expresses only the relation of these things to our needs, may also
change. Natural needs themselves are continually changing. Indeed, what
could be more varied than the objects which form the staple food of
different peoples!

The conflict does not take place between utility and estimation; it
takes place between the marketable value demanded by the supplier and
the marketable value supplied by the demander. The exchange value of the
product is each time the resultant of these contradictory appreciations.

In final analysis, supply and demand bring together production and
consumption, but production and consumption based on individual
exchanges.

The product supplied is not useful in itself. It is the consumer who
determines its utility. And even when its quality of being useful is
admitted, it does not exclusively represent utility. In the course of
production, it has been exchanged for all the costs of production, such
as raw materials, wages of workers, etc., all of which are marketable
values. The product, therefore, represents, in the eyes of the producer,
a sum total of marketable values. What he supplies is not only a useful
object, but also and above all a marketable value.

As to demand, it will only be effective on condition that it has means
of exchange at its disposal. These means are themselves products,
marketable value.

In supply and demand, then, we find on the one hand a product which has
cost marketable values, and the need to sell; on the other, means which
have cost marketable values, and the desire to buy.

M. Proudhon opposes the _free buyer_ to the _free producer_. To the one
and to the other he attributes purely metaphysical qualities. It is this
that makes him say: “It is proved that it is man’s free will that gives
rise to the opposition between use value and exchange value.” (Vol. I,
p. 41)

The producer, the moment he produces in a society founded on the
division of labour and on exchange (and that is M. Proudhon’s
hypothesis), is forced to sell. M. Proudhon makes the producer master of
the means of production; but he will agree with us that his means of
production do not depend on free will. Moreover, many of these means of
production are products which he gets from the outside, and in modern
production he is not even free to produce the amount he wants. The
actual degree of development of the productive forces compels him to
produce on such or such a scale.

The consumer is no freer than the producer. His judgment depends on his
means and his needs. Both of these are determined by his social
position, which itself depends on the whole social organization. True,
the worker who buys potatoes and the kept woman who buys lace both
follow their respective judgments. But the difference in their judgments
is explained by the difference in the positions which they occupy in the
world, and which themselves are the product of social organization.

Is the entire system of needs on estimation or on the whole organization
of production? Most often, needs arise directly from production or from
a state of affairs based on production. Thus, to choose another example,
does not the need for lawyers suppose a given civil law which is but the
expression of a certain development of property, that is to say, of
production?

It is not enough for M. Proudhon to have eliminated the elements just
mentioned from the relation of supply and demand. He carries abstraction
to the furthest limits when he fuses all producers into one single
producer, all consumers into one single consumer, and sets up a struggle
between these two chimerical personages. But in the real world, things
happen otherwise. The competition among the suppliers and the
competition among the demanders form a necessary part of the struggle
between buyers and sellers, of which marketable value is the result.

After having eliminated competition and the cost of production, M.
Proudhon can at his ease reduce the formula of supply and demand to an
absurdity.

“Supply and demand,” he says, “are merely two ceremonial forms that
serve to bring use value and exchange value face to face, and to lead to
their reconciliation. They are the two electric poles which, when
connected, must produce the phenomenon of affinity called exchange.”
(Volume I, pp. 49 and 50)

One might as well say that exchange is merely a “ceremonial form” for
introducing the consumer to the object of consumption. One might as well
say that all economic relations are “ceremonial forms” serving immediate
consumption as go-betweens. Supply and demand are neither more nor less
relations of a given production than are individual exchanges.

What, then, does all M. Proudhon’s dialectic consist in? In the
substitution for use value and exchange value, for supply and demand, of
abstract and contradictory notions like scarcity and abundance, utility
and estimation, one producer and one consumer, both of them _knights of
free will_.

And what was he aiming at?

At arranging for himself a means of introducing later on one of the
elements he had set aside, the _cost of production_, as the _synthesis_
of use value and exchange value. And it is thus that in his eyes the
cost of production constitutes _synthetic value_ or _constituted value_.

§ 2. Constituted Value or Synthetic Value

Value (marketable value) is the corner-stone of the economic structure.
“Constituted” value is the corner-stone of the system of economic
contradictions.

What then is this “constituted value” which is all M. Proudhon has
discovered in political economy?

Once utility is admitted, labour is the source of all value. The measure
of labour is time. The relative value of products is determined by the
labour time required for their production. Price is the monetary
expression of the relative value of a product. Finally, the constituted
value of a product is purely and simply the value which is constituted
by the labour time incorporated in it.

Just as Adam Smith discovered the division of labour, so he, M.
Proudhon, claims to have discovered “constituted value.” This is not
exactly “something unheard of,” but then it must be admitted that there
is nothing unheard of in any discovery of economic science. M. Proudhon,
who fully appreciates the importance of his own invention, seeks
nevertheless to tone down the merit therefore “in order to reassure the
reader as to his claims to originality, and to win over minds whose
timidity renders them little favourable to new ideas.” But in
apportioning the contribution made by each of his predecessors to the
understanding of value, he is forced to confess openly that the largest
portion, the lion’s share, of the merit falls to himself.

“The synthetic idea of value had been vaguely perceived by Adam
Smith.... But with Adam Smith the idea of value was entirely intuitive.
Now, society does not change its habits merely on the strength of
intuitions: its decisions are made only on the authority of facts. The
antinomy had to be stated more palpably and more clearly: J.B. Say was
its chief interpreter.”

Here, in a nutshell, is the history of the discovery of synthetic value:
Adam Smith – vague intuition; J. B. Say – antinomy; M. Proudhon –
constituting and “constituted” truth. And let there be no mistake about
it: all the other economists, from Say to Proudhon, have merely been
trudging along in the rut of antinomy.

“It is incredible that for the last 40 years so many men of sense should
have fumed and fretted at such a simple idea. But no, values are
compared without there being any point of comparison between them and
with no unit of measurements; this, rather than embrace the
revolutionary theory of equality, is what the economists of the 19th
century are resolved to uphold against all comers. What will posterity
say about it?” (Volume I, p. 68)

Posterity, so abruptly invoked, will begin by getting muddled over the
chronology. It is bound to ask itself: are not Ricardo and his school
economists of the 19th century? Ricardo’s system, putting as a principle
that “the relative value of commodities corresponds exclusively to their
production,” dates from 1817. Ricardo is the head of a whole school
dominant in England since the Restoration. [The Restoration began after
the termination of the Napoleonic wars and the restoration of the
Bourbon dynasty in France in 1815.] The Ricardian doctrine summarizes
severely, remorselessly, the whole of the English bourgeoisie. “What
will posterity say about it?” It will not say that M. Proudhon did not
know Ricardo, for he talks about him, he talks at length about him, he
keeps coming back to him, and concludes by calling his system “trash.”
If ever posterity does interfere, it will say perhaps that M. Proudhon,
afraid of offending his readers’ Anglophobia, preferred to make himself
the responsible editor of Ricardo’s ideas. In any case, it will think it
very naive that M. Proudhon should give as a “revolutionary theory of
the future” what Ricardo expounded scientifically as the theory of
present-day society, of bourgeois society, and that he should thus take
for the solution of the antinomy between utility and exchange value what
Ricardo and his school presented long before him as the scientific
formula of one single side of this antinomy, that of exchange value. But
let us leave posterity alone once and for all, and confront M. Proudhon
with his predecessor Ricardo. Here are some extracts from this author
which summarize his doctrine on value:

“Utility then is not the measure of exchangeable value, although it is
absolutely essential to it.” (Volume I, p. 3, Principles de l’économie
politique, etc., translated from the English by F. S. Constancio, Paris
1835)

“Possessing utility, commodities derive their exchangeable value from
two sources: from their scarcity, and from the quantity of labour
required to obtain them. There are some commodities, the value of which
is determined by their scarcity alone. No labour can increase the
quantity of such goods, and therefore their value cannot be lowered by
an increased supply. Some rare statues and pictures, scarce books... are
all of this description. Their value... varies with the varying wealth
and inclinations of those who are desirous to possess them.” (Volume I,
pp. 4 and 5, _l. c_.) “These commodities, however, form a very small
part of the mass of commodities daily exchanged in the market. By far
the greatest part of these goods which are the objects of desire, are
procured by labour; and they may be multiplied, not in one country
alone, but in many, almost without any assignable limit, if we are
disposed to bestow the labour necessary to obtain them.” (Volume I, pp.
5, _l. c_.)

“In speaking then of commodities, of their exchangeable value, and of
the laws which regulate their relative prices, we mean always such
commodities only as can be increased in quantity by the exertion of
human industry, and on the production of which competition operates
without restraint.” (Volume I, p .5)

Ricardo quotes Adam Smith, who, according to him, “so accurately defined
the original source of exchangeable value” (Adam Smith, Wealth of
Nations, Book I, Chap 5 [An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the
Wealth of Nations, first edition appearing in London, 1776]), and he
adds:

“That this (i.e., labour time) is really the foundation of the
exchangeable value of all things, excepting those which cannot be
increased by human industry, is a doctrine of the utmost importance in
political economy; for from no source do so many errors, and so much
difference of opinion in that science proceed, as from the vague ideas
which are attached to the word value.” (Volume I, p. 8)

“If the quantity of labour realised in commodities regulate their
exchangeable value, every increase of the quantity of labour must
augment the value of that commodity on which it is exercised, as every
diminution must lower it.” (Volume I, p. 8)

Ricardo goes on to reproach Smith:

1. With having “himself erected another standard measure of value” than
labour. “Sometimes he speaks of corn, at other times of labour, as a
standard measure; not the quantity of labour bestowed on the production
of any object, but the quantity it can command in the market.” (Vol. I,
pp. 9 and 10)

2. With having “admitted the principle without qualification and at the
same time restricted its application to that early and rude state of
society, which precedes both the accumulation of stock and the
appropriation of land.” (Vol. I, p. 21)

Ricardo sets out to prove that the ownership of land, that is, ground
rent, cannot change the relative value of commodities and that the
accumulation of capital has only a passing and fluctuating effect on the
relative values determined by the comparative quantity of labour
expended on their production. In support of this thesis, he gives his
famous theory of ground rent, analyses capital, and ultimately finds
nothing in it but accumulated labour. Then he develops a whole theory of
wages and profits, and proves that wages and profits rise and fall in
inverse ratio to each other, without affecting the relative value of the
product. He does not neglect the influence that the accumulation of
capital and its different aspects (fixed capital and circulating
capital), as also the rate of wages, can have on the proportional value
of products. In fact, they are the chief problems with which Ricardo is
concerned.

“Economy in the use of labour never fails to reduce the relative
value[2] of a commodity, whether the saving be in the labour necessary
to the manufacture of the commodity itself, or in that necessary to the
formation of the capital, by the aid of which it is produced.” (Vol. I,
p. 28) “Under such circumstance the value of the deer, the produce of
the hunter’s day’s labour, would be exactly equal to the value of the
fish, the produce of the fisherman’s day’s labour. The comparative value
of the fish and the game would be entirely regulated by the quantity of
labour realised in each, whatever might be the quantity of production,
or however high or low general wages or profits might be.” (Vol. I, p.
28) “In making labour the foundation of the value of commodities and the
comparative quantity of labour which is necessary to their production,
the rule which determines the respective quantities of goods which shall
be given in exchange for each other, we must not be supposed to deny the
accidental and temporary deviations of the actual or market price of
commodities from this, their primary and natural price.” (Vol. I, p.
105, _l. c_.) “It is the cost of production which must ultimately
regulate the price of commodities, and not, as has been often said, the
proportion between supply and demand.” (Vol. II, p. 253)

Lord Lauderdale had developed the variations of exchange value according
to the law of supply and demand, or of scarcity and abundance relatively
to demand. In his opinion the value of a thing can increase when its
quantity decreases or when the demand for it increases; it can decrease
owing to an increase of its quantity or owing to the decrease in demand.
Thus the value of a thing can change through eight different causes,
namely, four causes that apply to money or to any other commodity which
serves as a measure of its value. Here is Ricardo’s refutation:

“Commodities which are monopolised, either by an individual, or by a
company, vary according to the law which Lord Lauderdale has laid down:
they fall in proportion as the sellers augment their quantity, and rise
in proportion to the eagerness of the buyers to purchase them; their
price has no necessary connexion with their natural value; but the
prices of commodities, which are subject to competition, and whose
quantity may be increased in any moderate degree, will ultimately
depend, not on the state of demand and supply, but on the increased or
diminished cost of their production.” (Vol. II, p. 259)

We shall leave it to the reader to make the comparison between this
simple, clear, precise language of Ricardo’s and M. Proudhon’s
rhetorical attempts to arrive at the determination of relative value by
labour time.

Ricardo shows us the real movement of bourgeois production, which
constitutes value. M. Proudhon, leaving the real movement out of
account, “fumes and frets” in order to invent new processes and to
achieve the reorganisation of the world on a would-be new formula, which
formula is no more than the theoretical expression of the real movement
which exists and which is so well described by Ricardo. Ricardo takes
his starting point from present-day society to demonstrate to us how it
constitutes value – M. Proudhon takes constituted value as his starting
point to construct a new social world with the aid of this value. For
him, M. Proudhon, constituted value must move around and become once
more the constituting factor in a world already completely constituted
according to this mode of evaluation. The determination of value by
labour time is, for Ricardo, the law of exchange value; for M. Proudhon,
it is the synthesis of use value and exchange value. Ricardo’s theory of
values is the scientific interpretation of actual economic life; M.
Proudhon’s theory of values is the utopian interpretation of Ricardo’s
theory. Ricardo establishes the truth of his formula by deriving it from
all economic relations, and by explaining in this way all phenomena,
even those like ground rent, accumulation of capital and the relation of
wages to profits, which at first sight seems to contradict it; it is
precisely that which makes his doctrine a scientific system: M.
Proudhon, who has rediscovered this formula of Ricardo’s by means of
quite arbitrary hypotheses, is forced thereafter to seek out isolated
economic facts which he twists and falsifies to pass them off as
examples, already existing applications, beginning of realization of his
regenerating idea. (See our §3. Application of Constituted Value)

Now let us pass on to the conclusions M. Proudhon draws from value
constituted (by labour time).

– A certain quantity of labour is equivalent to the product created by
this same quantity of labour.

– Each day’s labour is worth as much as another day’s labour; that is to
say, if the quantities are equal, one man’s labour is worth as much as
another man’s labour: there is no qualitative difference. With the same
quantity of work, one man’s product can be given in exchange for another
man’s product. All men are wage workers getting equal pay for an equal
time of work. Perfect equality rules the exchanges.

Are these conclusions the strict, natural consequences of value
“constituted” or determined by labour time?

If the relative value of a commodity is determined by the quantity of
labour required to produce it, it follows naturally that the relative
value of labour, or wages, is likewise determined by the quantity of
labour needed to produce the wages. Wages, that is, the relative value
or the price of labour, are thus determined by the labour time needed to
produce all that is necessary for the maintenance of the worker.

“_Diminish the cost of production_ of hats, and their price will
ultimately fall to their own new natural price, although the demand
should be doubled, trebled, or quadrupled. _Diminish the cost of
subsistence of men_, by diminishing the natural price of food and
clothing, by which life is sustained, and wages will ultimately fall,
notwithstanding the demand for labourers may very greatly increase.”
(Ricardo, Vol. II, p. 253)

Doubtless, Ricardo’s language is as cynical as can be. To put the cost
of manufacture of hats and the cost of maintenance of men on the same
plane is to turn men into hats. But do not make an outcry at the
cynicism of it. The cynicism is in the facts and not in the words which
express the facts. French writers like M.M. Droz, Blanqui, Rossi and
others take an innocent satisfaction in proving their superiority over
the English economists, by seeking to observe the etiquette of a
“humanitarian” phraseology; if they reproach Ricardo and his school for
their cynical language, it is because it annoys them to see economic
relations exposed in all their crudity, to see the mysteries of the
bourgeoisie unmasked.

To sum up: Labour, being itself a commodity, is measured as such by the
labour time needed to produce the labour-commodity. And what is needed
to produce this labour-commodity? Just enough labour time to produce the
objects indispensable to the constant maintenance of labour, that is, to
keep the worker alive and in a condition to propagate his race. The
natural price of labour is no other than the minimum wage.[3] If the
current rate of wages rises above this natural price, it is precisely
because the law of value put as a principle by M. Proudhon happens to be
counterbalanced by the consequences of the varying relations of supply
and demand. But the minimum wage is nonetheless the centre towards which
the current rates of wages gravitate.

Thus relative value, measured by labour time, is inevitably the formula
of the present enslavement of the worker, instead of being, as M.
Proudhon would have it, the “revolutionary theory” of the emancipation
of the proletariat.

Let us now see to what extent the application of labour time as a
measure of value is incompatible with the existing class antagonism and
the unequal distribution of the product between the immediate worker and
the owner of accumulated labour.

Let us take a particular product: broadcloth, which has required the
same quantity of labour as the linen.

If there is an exchange of these two products, there is an exchange of
equal quantities of labour. In exchanging these equal quantities of
labour time, one does not change the reciprocal position of the
producers, any more than one changes anything in the situation of the
workers and manufacturers among themselves. To say that this exchange of
products measured by labour time results in an equality of payment for
all the producers is to suppose that equality of participation in the
product existed before the exchange. When the exchange of broadcloth for
linen has been accomplished, the producers of broadcloth will share in
the linen in a proportion equal to that in which they previously shared
in the broadcloth.

M. Proudhon’s illusion is brought about by his taking for a consequence
what could be at most but a gratuitous supposition.

Let us go further.

Does labour time, as the measure of value, suppose at least that the
days are equivalent, and that one man’s day is worth as much as
another’s? No.

Let us suppose for a moment that a jeweller’s day is equivalent to three
days of a weaver; the fact remains that any change in the value of
jewels relative to that of woven materials, unless it be the transitory
result of the fluctuations of supply and demand, must have as its cause
a reduction or an increase in the labour time expended in the production
of one or the other. If three working days of different workers be
related to one another in the ratio of 1:2:3, then every change in the
relative value of their products will be a change in this same
proportion of 1:2:3. Thus values can be measured by labour time, in
spite of the inequality of value of different working days; but to apply
such a measure we must have a comparative scale of the different working
days: it is competition that sets up this scale.

Is your hour’s labour worth mine? That is a question which is decided by
competition.

Competition, according to an American economist, determines how many
days of simple labour are contained in one day’s compound labour. Does
not this reduction of days of compound labour to days of simple labour
suppose that simple labour is itself taken as a measure of value? If the
mere quantity of labour functions as a measure of value regardless of
quality, it presupposes that simple labour has become the pivot of
industry. It presupposes that labour has been equalized by the
subordination of man to the machine or by the extreme division of
labour; that men are effaced by their labour; that the pendulum of the
clock has become as accurate a measure of the relative activity of two
workers as it is of the speed of two locomotives. Therefore, we should
not say that one man’s hour is worth another man’s hour, but rather that
one man during an hour is worth just as much as another man during an
hour. Time is everything, man is nothing; he is, at the most, time’s
carcass. Quality no longer matters. Quantity alone decides everything;
hour for hour, day for day; but this equalising of labour is not by any
means the work of M. Proudhon’s eternal justice; it is purely and simply
a fact of modern industry.

In the automatic workshop, one worker’s labour is scarcely
distinguishable in any way from another worker’s labour: workers can
only be distinguished one from another by the length of time they take
for their work. Nevertheless, this quantitative difference becomes, from
a certain point of view, qualitative, in that the time they take for
their work depends partly on purely material causes, such as physical
constitution, age and sex; partly on purely negative moral causes, such
as patience, imperturbability, diligence. In short, if there is a
difference of quality in the labour of different workers, it is at most
a quality of the last kind, which is far from being a distinctive
speciality. This is what the state of affairs in modern industry amounts
to in the last analysis. It is upon this equality, already realised in
automatic labour, that M. Proudhon wields his smoothing-plane of
“equalisation,” which he means to establish universally in “time to
come!”

All the “equalitarian” consequences which M. Proudhon deduces from
Ricardo’s doctrine are based on a fundamental error. He confounds the
value of commodities measured by the quantity of labour embodied in them
with the value of commodities measured by “the value of labour.” If
these two ways of measuring the value of commodities were equivalent, it
could be said indifferently that the relative value of any commodity is
measured by the quantity of labour embodied in it; or that it is
measured by the quantity of labour it can buy; or again that it is
measured by the quantity of labour which can acquire it. But this is far
from being so. The value of labour can no more serve as a measure of
value than the value of any other commodity. A few examples will suffice
to explain still better what we have just stated.

If a quarter of corn cost two days’ labour instead of one, it would have
twice its original value; but it would not set in operation double the
quantity of labour, because it would contain no more nutritive matter
than before. Thus the value of the corn, measured by the quantity of
labour used to produce it, would have doubled; but measured either by
the quantity of labour it can buy or the quantity of labour with which
it can be bought, it would be far from having doubled. On the other
hand, if the same labour produced twice as many clothes as before, their
relative value would fall by half; but, nevertheless, this double
quantity of clothing would not thereby be reduced to disposing over only
half the quantity of labour, nor could the same labour command the
double quantity of clothing; for half the clothes would still go on
rendering the worker the same service as before.

Thus it is going against economic facts to determine the relative value
of commodities by the value of labour. It is moving in a vicious circle,
it is to determine relative value by a relative value which itself needs
to be determined.

It is beyond doubt that M. Proudhon confuses the two measures, measure
by the labour time needed for the production of a commodity and measure
by the value of the labour.

“Any man’s labour,” he says, “can buy the value it represents.”

Thus, according to him, a certain quantity of labour embodied in a
product is equivalent to the worker’s payment, that is, to the value of
labour. It is the same reasoning that makes him confuse cost of
production with wages.

“What are wages? They are the cost price of corn, etc., the integral
price of all things. Let us go still further. Wages are the
proportionality of the elements which compose wealth.”

What are wages? They are the value of labour.

Adam Smith takes as the measure of value, now the time of labour needed
for the production of a commodity, now the value of labour. Ricardo
exposes this error by showing clearly the disparity of these two ways of
measuring. M. Proudhon goes one better than Adam Smith in error by
identifying the two things which the latter had merely put in
juxtaposition.

It is in order to find the proper proportion in which workers should
share in the products, or, in other words, to determine the relative
value of labour, that M. Proudhon seeks a measure for the relative value
of commodities. To find out the measure for the relative value of
commodities he can think of nothing better than to give as the
equivalent of a certain quantity of labour the sum total of the products
it has created, which is as good as supposing that the whole of society
consists merely of workers who receive their own produce as wages. In
the second place, he takes for granted the equivalence of the working
days of different workers. In short, he seeks the measure of the
relative value of commoditising order to arrive at equal payment for the
workers, and he takes the equality of wages as an already established
fact, in order to go off on the search for the relative value of
commodities. What admirable dialectics!

“Say and the economists after him have observed that labour being itself
subject to valuation, being a commodity like any other commodity, it is
moving in a vicious circle to treat it as the principle and the
determining cause of value. In so doing, these economists, if they will
allow me to say so, show a prodigious carelessness. Labour is said to
have value not as a commodity itself, but in view of the values which it
is supposed potentially to contain. The value of labour is a figurative
expression, an anticipation of the cause for the effect. It is a fiction
of the same stamp as the productivity of capital. Labour produces,
capital has value... By a sort of ellipsis one speaks of the value of
labour.... Labour like liberty ... is a thing vague and indeterminate by
nature, but defined qualitatively by its object, that is to say, it
becomes a reality by the product.”

“But is there any need to dwell on this? The moment the economist (read
M. Proudhon) changes the name of things, _vera rerum vocabula_ (the true
name of things), he is implicitly confessing his impotence and
proclaiming himself not privy to the cause.” (Proudhon, Vol. I, p. 188)

We have seen that M. Proudhon makes the value of labour the “determining
cause” of the value of products to such an extent that for him wages,
the official name for the “value of labour,” form the integral price of
all things: that is why Say’s objection troubles him. In labour as a
commodity, which is a grim reality, he sees nothing but a grammatical
ellipsis. Thus the whole of existing society, founded on labour as a
commodity, is henceforth founded on a poetic licence, a figurative
expression. If society wants to “eliminate all the drawbacks” that
assail it, well, let it eliminate all the ill-sounding terms, change the
language; and to this end it has only to apply to the Academy for a new
edition of its dictionary. After all that we have just seen, it is easy
for us to understand why M. Proudhon, in a work on political economy,
has to enter upon long dissertations on etymology and other parts of
grammar. Thus he is still learnedly discussing the antiquated derivation
of servus [a slave, servant] from servare [To preserve]. These
philological dissertations have a deep meaning, an esoteric meaning –
they form an essential part of M. Proudhon’s argument.

Labour,[4] inasmuch as it is bought and sold, is a commodity like any
other commodity, and has, in consequence, an exchange value. But the
value of labour, or labour as a commodity, produces as little as the
value of wheat, or wheat as a commodity, serves as food.

Labour “is worth” more or less, according to whether food commodities
are more or less dear, whether the supply and demand of hands exist to
such or such a degree, etc., etc.

Labour is not a “vague thing”; it is always some definite labour, it is
never labour in general that is bought and sold. It is not only labour
that is qualitatively defined by the object; but also the object which
is determined by the specific quality of labour.

Labour, in so far as it is bought and sold, is itself a commodity. Why
is it bought? “Because of the values it is supposed potentially to
contain.” But if a certain thing is said to be a commodity, there is no
longer any question as to the reason why it is bought, that is, as to
the utility to be derived from it, the application to be made of it. It
is a commodity as an object of traffic. All M. Proudhon’s arguments are
limited to this: labour is not bought as an immediate object of
consumption. No, it is bought as an instrument of production, as a
machine would be bought. As a commodity, labour has no value and does
not produce. M. Proudhon might just as well have said that there is no
such thing as a commodity, since every commodity is obtained merely for
some utilitarian purpose, and never as a commodity in itself.

In measuring the value of commodities by labour, M. Proudhon vaguely
glimpses the impossibility of excluding labour from this same measure,
in so far as labour has a value, as labour is a commodity. He has a
misgiving that it is turning the wage minimum into the natural and
normal price of immediate labour, that it is accepting the existing
state of society. So, to get away from this fatal consequence, he faces
about and asserts that labour is not a commodity, that it cannot have
value. He forgets that he himself has taken the value of labour as a
measure, he forgets that his whole system rests on labour as a
commodity, on labour which is bartered, bought, sold, exchanged for
produce, etc., on labour, in fact, which is an immediate source of
income for the worker. He forgets everything.

To save his system, he consents to sacrifice its basis.

_Et propter vitam vivendi perdere causas!_ [And for the sake of life to
lose the reasons for living]

We now come to a new definition of “constituted value.”

“Value is the proportional relation of the products which constitute
wealth.”

Let us note in the first place that the single phrase “relative or
exchange value” implies the idea of some relation in which products are
exchanged reciprocally. By giving the name “proportional relation” to
this relation, no change is made in the relative value, except in the
expression. Neither the depreciation nor the enhancement of the value of
a product destroys its quality of being in some “proportional relation”
with the other products which constitute wealth.

Why then this new term, which introduces no new idea?

“Proportional relation” suggests many other economic relations, such as
proportionality in production, the true proportion between supply and
demand, etc., and M. Proudhon is thinking of all that when he formulates
this didactic paraphrase of marketable value.

In the first place, the relative value of products being determined by
the comparative amount of labour used in the production of each of them,
proportional relations, applied to this special case, stand for the
respective quota of products which can be manufactured in a given time,
and which in consequence are given in exchange for one another.

Let us see what advantage M. Proudhon draws from this proportional
relation.

Everyone knows that when supply and demand are evenly balanced, the
relative value of any product is accurately determined by the quantity
of labour embodied in it, that is to say, that this relative value
expresses the proportional relation precisely in the sense we have just
attached to it. M. Proudhon inverts the order of things. Begin, he says,
by measuring the relative value of a product by the quantity of labour
embodied in it, and supply and demand will infallibly balance one
another. Production will correspond to consumption, the product will
always be exchangeable. Its current price will express exactly its true
value. Instead of saying like everyone else: when the weather is fine, a
lot of people are to be seen going out for a walk. M. Proudhon makes his
people go out for a walk in order to be able to ensure them fine
weather.

What M. Proudhon gives as the consequence of marketable value determined
a priori by labour time could be justified only by a law couched more or
less in the following terms:

Products will in future be exchanged in the exact ratio of the labour
time they have cost. Whatever may be the proportion of supply to demand,
the exchange of commodities will always be made as if they had been
produced proportionately to the demand. Let M. Proudhon take it upon
himself to formulate and lay down such a law, and we shall relieve him
of the necessity of giving proofs. If, on the other hand, he insists on
justifying his theory, not as a legislator, but as an economist, he will
have to prove that the time needed to create a commodity indicates
exactly the degree of its utility and marks its proportional relation to
the demand, and in consequence, to the total amount of wealth. In this
case, if a product is sold at a price equal to its cost of production,
supply and demand will always be evenly balanced; for the cost of
production is supposed to express the true relation between supply and
demand.

Actually, M. Proudhon sets out to prove that labour time needed to
create a product indicates its true proportional relation to needs, so
that the things whose production costs the least time are the most
immediately useful, and so on, step by step. The mere production of a
luxury object proves at once, according to this doctrine, that society
has spare time which allows it to satisfy a need for luxury.

M. Proudhon finds the very proof of his thesis in the observation that
the most useful things cost the least time to produce, that society
always begins with the easiest industries and successively “starts on
the production of objects which cost more labour time and which
correspond to a higher order of needs.”

M. Proudhon borrows from M. Dunoyer the example of extractive industry –
fruit-gathering, pasturage, hunting, fishing, etc. – which is the
simplest, the least costly of industries, and the one by which man began
“the first day of his second creation.” The first day of his first
creation is recorded in Genesis, which shows God as the world’s first
manufacturer.

Things happen in quite a different way from what M. Proudhon imagines.
The very moment civilisation begins, production begins to be founded on
the antagonism of orders, estates, classes, and finally on the
antagonism of accumulated labour and actual labour. No antagonism, no
progress. This is the law that civilisation has followed up to our days.
Till now the productive forces have been developed by virtue of this
system of class antagonisms. To say now that, because all the needs of
all the workers were satisfied, men could devote themselves to the
creation of products of a higher order – to more complicated industries
– would be to leave class antagonism out of account and turn all
historical development upside down. It is like saying that because,
under the Roman emperors, muraena were fattened in artificial fishponds,
therefore there was enough to feed abundantly the whole Roman
population. Actually, on the contrary, the Roman people had not enough
to buy bread with, while the Roman aristocrats had slaves enough to
throw as fodder to the muraena.

The price of food has almost continuously risen, while the price of
manufactured and luxury goods has almost continuously fallen. Take the
agricultural industry itself; the most indispensable objects, like corn,
meat, etc., rise in price, while cotton, sugar, coffee, etc., fall in a
surprising proportion. And even among comestibles proper, the luxury
articles, like artichokes, asparagus, etc., are today relatively cheaper
than foodstuffs of prime necessity. In our age, the superfluous is
easier to produce than the necessary. Finally, at different historical
epochs, the reciprocal price relations are not only different, but
opposed to one another. In the whole of the Middle Ages, agricultural
products were relatively cheaper than manufactured products; in modern
times they are in inverse ratio. Does this mean that the utility of
agricultural products has diminished since the Middle Ages?

The use of products is determined by the social conditions in which the
consumers find themselves placed, and these conditions themselves are
based on class antagonism.

Cotton, potatoes and spirits are objects of the most common use.
Potatoes have engendered scrofula; cotton has to a great extent driven
out flax and wool, although wool and flax are, in many cases, of greater
utility, if only from the point of view of hygiene; finally, spirits
have got the upper hand of beer and wine, although spirits used as an
alimentary substance are everywhere recognised to be poison. For a whole
century, governments struggled in vain against the European opium;
economics prevailed, and dictated its orders to consumption.

Why are cotton, potatoes and spirits the pivots of bourgeois society?
Because the least amount of labour is needed to produce them, and,
consequently, they have the lowest price. Why does the minimum price
determine the maximum consumption? Is it by any chance because of the
absolute utility of these objects, their intrinsic utility, their
utility insomuch as they correspond, in the most useful manner, in the
needs of the worker as a man, and not to the man as a worker? No, it is
because in a society founded on poverty the poorest products have the
fatal prerogative of being used by the greatest number.

To say now that because the least costly things are in greater use, they
must be of greater utility, is saying that the wide use of spirits,
because of their low cost of production, is the most conclusive proof of
their utility; it is telling the proletarian that potatoes are more
wholesome for him than meat; it is accepting the present state of
affairs; it is, in short, making an apology, with M. Proudhon, for a
society without understanding it.

In a future society, in which class antagonism will have ceased, in
which there will no longer be any classes, use will no longer be
determined by the minimum time of production; but the time of production
devoted to different articles will be determined by the degree of their
social utility.

To return to M. Proudhon’s thesis: the moment the labour time necessary
for the production of an article ceases to be the expression of its
degree of utility, the exchange value of this same article, determined
beforehand by the labour time embodied in it, becomes quite usable to
regulate the true relation of supply to demand, that is, the
proportional relation in the sense M. Proudhon at the moment attributes
to it.

It is not the sale of a given product at the price of its cost of
production that constitutes the “proportional relation” of supply to
demand, or the proportional quota of this product relatively to the sum
total of production; it is the variations in supply and demand that show
the producer what amount of a given commodity he must produce in order
to receive in exchange at least the cost of production. And as these
variations are continually occurring, there is also a continual movement
of withdrawal and application of capital in the different branches of
industry.

“It is only in consequence of such variations that capital is
apportioned precisely, in the requisite abundance and no more, to the
production of the different commodities which happen to be in demand.
With the rise or fall of price, profits are elevated above, or depressed
below their general level, and capital is either encouraged to enter
into, or is warned to depart from, the particular employment in which
the variation has taken place.”

“When we look at the markets of a large town, and observe how regularly
they are supplied both with home and foreign commodities, in the
quantity in which they are required, under all the circumstances of
varying demand, arising from the caprice of taste, or a change in the
amount of population, without often producing either the effects of a
glut from a too abundant supply, or an enormously high price from the
supply being unequal to the demand, we must confess that the principle
which apportions capital to each trade in the precise amount that is
required, is more active than is generally supposed.” (Ricardo, Vol. I,
pp. 105 and 108)

If M. Proudhon admits that the value of products is determined by labour
time, he should equally admit that it is the fluctuating movement alone
that in societies founded on individual exchanges make labour the
measure of value. There is no ready-made constituted “proportional
relation,” but only a constituting movement.

We have just seen in what sense it is correct to speak of “proportion”
as of a consequence of value determined by labour time. We shall see now
how this measure by time, called by M. Proudhon the “law of proportion,”
becomes transformed into a law of _disproportion_.

Every new invention that enables the production in one hour of that
which has hitherto been produced in two hours depreciates all similar
products on the market. Competition forces the producer to sell the
product of two hours as cheaply as the product of one hour. Competition
carries into effect the law according to which the relative value of a
product is determined by the labour time needed to produce it. Labour
time serving as the measure of marketable value becomes in this way the
law of the continual depreciation of labour. We will say more. There
will be depreciation not only of the commodities brought into the
market, but also of the instruments of production and of whole plants.
This fact was already pointed out by Ricardo when he said:

“By constantly increasing the facility of production, we constantly
diminish the value of some of the commodities before produced.” (Vol.
II, p. 59)

Sismondi goes further. He sees in this “value _constituted_” by labour
time, the source of all the contradictions of modern industry and
commerce.

“Mercantile value,” he says, “is always determined in the long run by
the quantity of labour needed to obtain the thing evaluated: it is not
what it has actually cost, but what it would cost in the future with,
perhaps, perfected means; and this quantity, although difficult to
evaluate, is always faithfully established by competition.... It is on
this basis that the demand of the seller as well as the supply of the
buyer is reckoned. The former will perhaps declare that the thing has
cost him 10 days’ labour; but if the latter realises that it can
henceforth be produced with eight days’ labour, in the event of
competition proving this to the two contracting parties, the value will
be reduced, and the market price fixed at eight days only. Of course,
each of the parties believes that the thing is useful, that it is
desired, that without desire there would be no sale; but the fixing of
the price has nothing to do with utility.” (Etudes, etc., Vol. II, p.
267)

It is important to emphasise the point that what determines value is not
the time taken to produce a thing, but the minimum time it could
possibly be produced in, and the minimum is ascertained by competition.
Suppose for a moment that there is no more competition and consequently
no longer any means to ascertain the minimum of labour necessary for the
production of a commodity; what will happen? It will suffice to spend
six hours’ work on the production of an object, in order to have the
right, according to M. Proudhon, to demand in exchange six times as much
as the one who has taken only one hour to produce the same object.

Instead of a “proportional relation,” we have a disproportional
relation, at any rate if we insist on sticking to relations, good or
bad.

The continual depreciation of labour is only one side, one consequence
of the evaluation of commodities by labour time. The excessive raising
of prices, overproduction and many other features of industrial anarchy
have their explanation in this mode of evaluation.

But does labour time used as a measure of value give rise at least to
the proportional variety of products that so delights M. Proudhon?

On the contrary, monopoly in all its monotony follows in its wake and
invades the world of products, just as to everybody’s knowledge monopoly
invades the world of the instruments of production. It is only in a few
branches of industry, like the cotton industry, that very rapid progress
can be made. The natural consequence of this progress is that the
products of cotton manufacture, for instance, fall rapidly in price: but
as the price of cotton goes down, the price of flax will be replaced by
cotton. In this way, flax has been driven out of almost the whole of
North America. And we have obtained, instead of the proportional variety
of products, the dominance of cotton.

What is left of this “proportional relation”? Nothing but the pious wish
of an honest man who would like commodities to be produced in
proportions which would permit of their being sold at an honest price.
In all ages good-natured bourgeois and philanthropic economists have
taken pleasure in expressing this innocent wish.

Let us hear what old Boisguillebert says:

“The price of commodities,” he says, “must always be proportionate; for
it is such mutual understanding alone that can enable them to exist
together _so as to give themselves to one another at any moment_ (here
is M. Proudhon’s continual exchangeability) and reciprocally give birth
to one another. ... “As wealth, then, is nothing but this continual
intercourse between man and man, craft and craft, etc., it is a
frightful blindness to go looking for the cause of misery elsewhere than
in the cessation of such traffic brought about by a disturbance of
proportion in prices.” (Dissertation sur la nature des richesses,
Daire’s ed. [pp. 405 and 408]) [Boisguillebert’s work is quoted from the
symposium Economistes-financiers du XVIII siecle. Prefaced by a
historical sketch on each author and accompanied by commentaries and
explanatory notes by Eugene Daire, Paris, 1843.]

Let us listen also to a modern economist:

“The great law as necessary to be affixed to production, that is, the
law of proportion, which alone can preserve the continuity of value....
The equivalent must be guaranteed.... All nations have attempted, at
various periods of their history, by instituting numerous commercial
regulations and restrictions, to effect, in some degree, the object here
explained.... But the natural and inherent selfishness of man... has
urged him to break down all such regulations. Proportionate production
is the realisation of the entire truth of the Science of Social
Economy.” (W. Atkinson, Principles of Political Economy, London 1840,
pp. 170-95)

_Fuit Troja_. [Troy is no more.] This true proportion between supply and
demand, which is beginning once more to be the object of so many wishes,
ceased long ago to exist. It has passed into the stage of senility. It
was possible only at a time when the means of production were limited,
when the movement of exchange took place within very restricted bounds.
With the birth of large-scale industry this true proportion had to come
to an end, and production is inevitably compelled to pass in continuous
succession through vicissitudes of prosperity, depression, crisis,
stagnation, renewed prosperity, and so on.

Those who, like Sismondi, wish to return to the true proportion of
production, while preserving the present basis of society, are
reactionary, since, to be consistent, they must also wish to bring back
all the other conditions of industry of former times.

What kept production in true, or more or less true, proportions? It was
demand that dominated supply, that preceded it. Production followed
close on the heels of consumption. Large-scale industry, forced by the
very instruments at its disposal to produce on an ever-increasing scale,
can no longer wait for demand. Production precedes consumption, supply
compels demand.

In existing society, in industry based on individual exchange, anarchy
of production, which is the source of so much misery, is at the same
time the source of all progress.

Thus, one or the other:

Either you want the true proportions of past centuries with present-day
means of production, in which case you are both reactionary and utopian.

Or you want progress without anarchy: in which case, in order to
preserve the productive forces, you must abandon individual exchange.

Individual exchange is suited only to the small-scale industry of past
centuries with its corollary of “true proportion,” or else to
large-scale industry with all its train of misery and anarchy.

After all, the determination of value by labour time – the formula M.
Proudhon gives us as the regenerating formula of the future – is
therefore merely the scientific expression of the economic relations of
present-day society, as was clearly and precisely demonstrated by
Ricardo long before M. Proudhon.

But does the “equalitarian” application of this formula at least belong
to M. Proudhon? Was he the first to think of reforming society by
transforming all men into actual workers exchanging equal amounts of
labour? Is it really for him to reproach the Communists – these people
devoid of all knowledge of political economy, these “obstinately foolish
men,” these “paradise dreamers” – with not having found, before him,
this “solution of the problem of the proletariat”?

Anyone who is in any way familiar with the trend of political economy in
England cannot fail to know that almost all the Socialists in that
country have, at different periods, proposed the equalitarian
application of the Ricardian theory. We quote for M. Proudhon: Hodgskin,
Political Economy, 1827; William Thompson, An Inquiry into the
Principles of the Distribution of Wealth Most Conducive to Human
Happiness, 1824; T. R. Edmonds, Practical Moral and Political Economy,
1828 [18], etc., etc., and four pages more of etc. We shall content
ourselves with listening to an English Communist, Mr. Bray. We shall
give the decisive passages in his remarkable work, Labour’s Wrongs and
Labour’s Remedy, Leeds, 1839, and we shall dwell some time upon it,
firstly, because Mr. Bray is still little known in France, and secondly,
because we think that we have discovered in him the key to the past,
present and future works of M. Proudhon.

“The only way to arrive at truth is to go at once to First
Principles.... Let us... go at once to the source from whence
governments themselves have arisen.... By thus going to the origin of
the thing, we shall find that every form of government, and every social
and governmental wrong, owes its rise to the existing social system – to
the institution of property as it at present exists – and that,
therefore, if we would end our wrongs and our miseries at once and for
ever, the present arrangements of society must be totally subverted....
By thus fighting them upon their own ground, and with their own weapons,
we shall avoid that senseless clatter respecting ‘visionaries’ and
‘theorists’, with which they are so ready to assail all who dare move
one step from that beaten track which ‘by authority’, has been
pronounced to be the right one. Before the conclusions arrived at by
such a course of proceeding can be overthrown, the economists must unsay
or disprove those established truths and principles on which their own
arguments are founded.” (Bray, pp. 17 and 41) “It is labour alone which
bestows value.... Every man has an undoubted right to all that his
honest labour can procure him. When he thus appropriates the fruits of
his labour, he commits no injustice upon any other human being; for he
interferes with no other man’s right of doing the same with the produce
of his labour.... All these ideas of superior and inferior – of master
and man – may be traced to the neglect of First Principles, and to the
consequent rise of inequality of possessions; and such ideas will never
be subverted, so long as this inequality is maintained. Men have
hitherto blindly hoped to remedy the present unnatural state of
things... by destroying existing inequality; but it will be shortly
seen... that misgovernment is not a cause, but a consequence – that it
is not the creator, but the created – that is the offspring of
inequality of possessions; and that the inequality of possessions is
inseparably connected with our present social system.” (Bray, pp. 33, 36
and 37)

“Not only are the greatest advantages, but strict justice also, on the
side of a system of equality.... Every man is a link, in the chain of
effects – the beginning of which is but an idea, and the end, perhaps,
the production of a piece of cloth. Thus, although we may entertain
different feelings towards the several parties, it does not follow that
one should be better paid for his labour than another. The inventor will
ever receive, in addition to his just pecuniary reward, that which
genius only can obtain from us – the tribune of our admiration....

“From the very nature of labour and exchange, strict justice not only
requires that all exchangers should be mutually, but that they should
likewise be equally, benefited. Men have only two things which they can
exchange with each other, namely, labour, and the produce of labour....
If a just system of exchanges were acted upon, the value of articles
would be determined by the entire cost of production; and equal values
should always exchange for equal values. If, for instance, it takes a
hatter one day to make a hat, and a shoemaker the same time to make a
pair of shoes – supposing the material used by each to be of the same
value – and they exchange these articles with each other, they are not
only mutually but equally benefited: the advantage derived by either
party cannot be a disadvantage to the other, as each has given the same
amount of labour, and the materials made use of by each were of equal
value. But if the hatter should obtain _two_ pair of shoes for _one_ hat
– time and value of material being as before – the exchange would
clearly be an unjust one. The hatter would defraud the shoemaker of one
day’s labour; and were the former to act thus in all his exchanges, he
would receive, for the labour of _half a year_, the product of some
other person’s _whole year_. We have heretofore acted upon no other than
this most unjust system of exchanges – the workmen have given the
capitalist the labour of a whole year, in exchange for the value of only
half a year – and from this, and not from the assumed inequality of
bodily and mental powers in individuals, has arisen the inequality of
wealth and power which at present exists around us. It is an inevitable
condition of inequality of exchanges – of buying at one price and
selling at another – that capitalists shall continue to be capitalists,
and working men to be working men – the one a class of tyrants and the
other a class of slaves – to eternity....

“The whole transaction, therefore, plainly shews that the capitalists
and proprietors do no more than give the working man, for his labour of
one week, a part of the wealth which they obtained from him the week
before! – which amounts to giving him _nothing_ for _something_.... The
whole transaction, therefore, between the producer and the capitalist is
a palpable deception, a mere farce: it is, in fact, in thousands of
instances, no other than a barefaced though _legalized robbery_.” (Bray,
pp. 45, 48, 49 and 50)

.”.. the gain of the employer will never cease to be the loss of the
employed – until the exchanges between the parties are equal; and
exchanges never can be equal while society is divided into capitalists
and producers – the last living upon their labour and the first bloating
upon the profit of that labour.

“It is plain that, establish whatever form of government we will... we
may talk of morality and brotherly love... no reciprocity can exist
where there are unequal exchanges. Inequality of exchanges, as being the
cause of inequality of possessions, is the secret enemy that devours
us.” (Bray, pp. 51 and 52)

“It has been deduced, also, from a consideration of the intention and
end of society, not only that all men should labour, and thereby become
exchangers, but that equal values should always exchange for equal
values – and that, as the gain of one man ought never to be the loss of
another, value should be determined by cost of production. But we have
seen, that, under the present arrangements of society... the gain of the
capitalist and the rich man is always the loss of the workman – that
this result will invariably take place, and the poor man be left
entirely at the mercy of the rich man, under any and every form of
government, so long as there is inequality of exchanges – and that
equality of exchanges can be ensured only under social arrangements in
which labour is universal.... If exchanges were equal, would the wealth
of the present capitalists gradually go from them to the working
classes.” (Bray, pp. 53-55)

“So long as this system of unequal exchanges is tolerated, the producers
will be almost as poor and as ignorant and as hardworked as they are at
present, even if every governmental burthen be swept away and all taxes
be abolished... nothing but a total change of this system – an equality
of labour and exchanges – can alter this state of rights.... The
producers have but to make an effort – and by them must every effort for
their own redemption be made – and their chains will be snapped asunder
forever.... As an end, the political equality is there a failure, as a
means, also, it is there a failure.

“Where equal exchanges are maintained, the gain of one man cannot be the
loss of another; for every exchange is then simply a _transfer_, and not
a sacrifice of labour and wealth. Thus, although under a social system
based on equal exchanges, a parsimonious man may become rich, his wealth
will be no more than the accumulated produce of his own labour. He may
exchange his wealth, or he may give it to others... but a rich man
cannot continue wealthy for any length of time after he has ceased to
labour. Under equality of exchanges, wealth cannot have, as it now has,
a procreative and apparently self-generating power, such as replenishes
all waste from consumption; for, unless it be renewed by labour, wealth,
when once consumed, is given up for ever. That which is now called
profit and interest cannot exist as such in connection with equality of
exchanges; for producer and distributor would be alike remunerated, and
the sum total of their labour would determine the value of the article
created and brought to the hands of the consumer.

“The principle of equal exchanges, therefore, must from its very nature
ensure _universal labour_.” (Bray, pp. 67, 88, 89, 94, 109 and 10)

After having refuted the objections of the economists to communism, Mr.
Bray goes on to say:

“If, then a changed character be essential to the success of the social
system of community in its most perfect form – and if, likewise, the
present system affords no circumstances and no facilities for effecting
the requisite change of character and preparing man for the higher and
better state desired – it is evident that these things must necessarily
remain as they are.... or else some preparatory step must be discovered
and made use of – some movement partaking partly of the present and
partly of the desired system – some intermediate resting place, to which
society may go with all its faults and its follies, and from which it
may move forward, imbued with those qualities and attributes without
which the system of community and equality cannot as such have
existence.” (Bray, p. 134)

“The whole movement would require only co-operation in its simplest
form.... Cost of production would in every instance determine value; and
equal values would always exchange for equal values. If one person
worked a whole week, and another worked only half a week, the first
would receive double the remuneration of the last; but this extra pay of
the one would not be at the expense of the other, nor would the loss
incurred by the last man fall in any way upon the first. Each person
would exchange the wages he individually received for commodities of the
same value as his respective wages; and in no case could the gain of one
man or one trade be a loss to another man or another trade. The labour
of every individual would alone determine his gains of his losses....

.”..By means of general and local boards of trade... the quantities of
the various commodities required for consumption – the relative value of
each in regard to each other – the number of hands required in various
trades and descriptions of labour – and all other matters connected with
production and distribution, could in a short time be as easily
determined for a nation as for an individual company under the present
arrangements.... As individuals compose families, and families towns,
under the existing system, so likewise would they after the joint-stock
change had been effected. The present distribution of people in towns
and villages, bad as it is, would not be directly interfered with....
Under this joint-stock system, the same as under that now existing,
every individual would be at liberty to accumulate as much as he
pleased, and to enjoy such accumulations when and where he might think
proper.... The great productive section of the community... is divided
into an indefinite number of smaller sections, all working, producing
and exchanging their products on a footing of the most perfect
equality.... And the joint-stock modification (which is nothing but a
concession to present-day society in order to obtain communism), by
being so constituted as to admit of individual property in productions
in connection with a common property in productive powers – making every
individual dependent on his own exertions, and at the same time allowing
him an equal participation in every advantage afforded by nature and art
– is fitted to take society as it is, and to prepare the way for other
and better changes.” (Bray, pp. 158, 160, 162, 168 and 194)

We now only need to reply in a few words to Mr. Bray who without us and
in spite of us had managed to supplant M. Proudhon, except that Mr.
Bray, far from claiming the last word on behalf of humanity, proposes
merely measures which he thinks good for a period of transition between
existing society and a community regime.

One hour of Peter’s labour exchanges for one hour of Paul’s labour. That
is Mr. Bray’s fundamental axiom.

Let us suppose Peter has 12 hours’ labour before him, and Paul only six.
Peter will consequently have six hours’ labour left over. What will he
do with these six hours’ labour?

Either he will do nothing with them – in which case he will have worked
six hours for nothing; or else he will remain idle for another six hours
to get even; or else, as a last resource, he will give these six hours’
labour, which he has no use for, to Paul into the bargain.

What in the end will Peter have earned more than Paul? Some hours of
labour? No! He will have gained only hours of leisure; he will be forced
to play the loafer for six hours. And in order that this new right to
loaf might be not only relished but sought after in the new society,
this society would have to find in idleness its highest bliss, and to
look upon labour as a heavy shackle from which it must break free at all
costs. And indeed, to return to our example, if only these hours of
leisure that Peter had gained in excess of Paul were really a gain! Not
in the least. Paul, beginning by working only six hours, attains by
steady and regular work a result that Peter secures only by beginning
with an excess of work. Everyone will want to be Paul, there will be a
competition to occupy Paul’s position, a competition in idleness.

Well, then! What has the exchange of equal quantities of labour brought
us? Overproduction, depreciation, excess of labour followed by
unemployment; in short, economic relations such as we see in present-day
society, minus the competition of labour.

No! We are wrong! There is still an expedient which may save this new
society of Peters and Pauls. Peter will consume by himself the product
of the six hours’ labour which he has left. But since he has no longer
to exchange because he has produced, he has no need to produce for
exchange; and the whole hypothesis of a society founded on the exchange
and division of labour will fall to the ground. Equality of exchange
will have been saved by the simple fact that exchange will have ceased
to be: Paul and Peter would arrive at the position of Robinson.

Thus, if all the members of society are supposed to be actual workers,
the exchange of equal quantities of hours of labour is possible only on
condition that the number of hours to be spent on material production is
agreed on before hand. But such an agreement negates individual
exchange.

We still come to the same result, if we take as our starting point not
the distribution of the products created but the act of production. In
large-scale industry, Peter is not free to fix for himself the time of
his labour, for Peter’s labour is nothing without the co-operation of
all the Peters and all the Pauls who make up the workshop. This explains
very well the dogged resistance which the English factory owners put up
to the Ten Hours’ Bill.[5] They knew only too well that a two-hours’
reduction of labour granted to women and children would carry with it an
equal reduction of working hours for adult men. It is in the nature of
large-scale industry that working hours should be equal for all. What is
today the result of capital and the competition of workers among
themselves will be tomorrow, if you sever the relation between labour
and capital, an actual agreement based upon the relation between the sum
of productive forces and the sum of existing needs.

But such an agreement is a condemnation of individual exchange, and we
are back again at our first conclusion!

In principle, there is no exchange of products – but there is the
exchange of the labour which co-operates in production. The mode of
exchange of products depends upon the mode of exchange of the productive
forces. In general, the form of exchange of products corresponds to the
form of production. Change the latter, and the former will change in
consequence. Thus in the history of society we see that the mode of
exchanging products is regulated by the mode of producing them.
Individual exchange corresponds also to a definite mode of production
which itself corresponds to class antagonism. There is thus no
individual exchange without the antagonism of classes.

But the respectable conscience refuses to see this obvious fact. So long
as one is a bourgeois, one cannot but see in this relation of antagonism
a relation of harmony and eternal justice, which allows no one to gain
at the expense of another. For the bourgeois, individual exchange can
exist without any antagonism of classes. For him, these are two quite
unconnected things. Individual exchange, as the bourgeois conceives it,
is far from resembling individual exchange as it is practised.

Mr. Bray turns the illusion of the respectable bourgeois into an ideal
he would like to attain. In a purified individual exchange, freed from
all the elements of antagonism he finds in it, he sees an “equalitarian”
relation which he would like society to adopt generally.

Mr. Bray does not see that this equalitarian relation, this corrective
ideal that he would like to apply to the world, is itself nothing but
the reflection of the actual world; and that therefore it is totally
impossible to reconstitute society on the basis of what is merely an
embellished shadow of it. In proportion as this shadow takes on
substance again, we perceive that this substance, far from being the
transfiguration dreamt of, is the actual body of existing society.[6]

§ 3. Application of the Law of the Proportionality of Value

A) Money

“Gold and silver were the first commodities to have their value
constituted.” (Vol. I, p. 69)

Thus, gold and silver are the first applications of “value constituted”
... by M. Proudhon. And as M. Proudhon constitutes the value of products
determining it by the comparative amount of labour embodied in them, the
only thing he had to do was to prove that variations in the value of
gold and silver are always explained by variations in the labour time
taken to produce them. M. Proudhon has no intention of doing so. He
speaks of gold and silver not as commodities, but as money.

His only logic, if logic it be, consists in juggling with the capacity
of gold and silver to be used as money for the benefit of all the
commodities which have the property of being evaluated by labour time.
Decidedly there is more naiveté than malice in this jugglery.

A useful product, once it has been evaluated by the labour time needed
to produce it, is always acceptable in exchange; witness, cries M.
Proudhon, gold and silver, which exist in my desired conditions of
“exchangeability”! Gold and silver, then, are value which has reached a
state of constitution: they are the incorporation of M. Proudhon’s idea.
He could not have been happier in his choice of an example. Gold and
silver, apart from their capacity of being commodities, evaluated like
other commodities, in labour time, have also the capacity of being the
universal agents of exchange, of being money. By now considering gold
and silver as an application of “value constituted” by labour time,
nothing is easier than to prove that all commodities whose value is
constituted by labour time will always be exchangeable, will be money.

A very simple question occurs to M. Proudhon. Why have gold and silver
the privilege of typifying “constituted value?”

“The special function which usage has devolved upon the precious metal,
that of serving as a medium for trade, is purely conventional, and any
other commodity could, less conveniently perhaps, but just as reliably,
fulfil this function. Economists recognize this, and cite more than one
example. What then is the reason for this universal preference for
metals as money? And what is the explanation of this specialization of
the function of money – which has no analogy in political economy?... Is
it possible to reconstruct the series from which money seems to have
broken away, and hence to trace it back to its true principle?” (Vol. I,
pp. 68-69)

Straight away, by formulating the question in these terms, M. Proudhon
has presupposed the existence of money. The first question he should
have asked himself was, why, in exchanges as they are actually
constituted, it has been necessary to individualize exchangeable value,
so to speak, by the creation of a special agent of exchange. Money is
not a thing, it is a social relation. Why is the money relation a
production relation like any other economic relation, such as the
division of labour, etc.? If M. Proudhon had properly taken account of
this relation, he would not have seen in money an exception, an element
detached from a series unknown or needing reconstruction.

He would have realized, on the contrary, that this relation is a link,
and, as such, closely connected with a whole chain of other economic
relations; that this relation corresponds to a definite mode of
production neither more nor less than does individual exchange. What
does he do? He starts off by detaching money from the actual mode of
production as a whole, and then makes it the first member of an
imaginary series, of a series to be reconstructed.

Once the necessity for a specific agency of exchange, that is, for
money, has been recognized, all that remains to be explained is why this
particular function has developed upon gold and silver rather than upon
any commodity. This is a secondary question, which is explained not by
the chain of production relations, but by the specific qualities
inherent in gold and silver as substances. If all this has made
economists for once “go outside the domains of their own science, to
dabble in physics, mechanics, history and so on,” as M. Proudhon
reproaches them with doing, they have merely done what they were
compelled to do. The question was no longer within the domain of
political economy.

“What no economist,” says M. Proudhon, “has either seen or understood is
the economic reason which has determined, in favour of the precious
metals, the favour they enjoy.” (Vol. I, p. 69)

This economic reason which nobody – with good ground indeed – has seen
or understood, M. Proudhon has seen, understood and bequeathed to
posterity.

“What nobody else has noticed is that, of all commodities, gold and
silver were the first to have their value attain constitution. In the
patriarchal period, gold and silver were still bartered and exchanged in
ingots but even then they showed a visible tendency to become dominant
and received a marked degree of preference. Little by little the
sovereigns took possession of them and affixed their seal to them: and
of this sovereign consecration was born money, that is, the commodity
par excellence, which, notwithstanding all the shocks of commerce,
retains a definite proportional value and makes itself accepted for all
payments.... The distinguishing characteristic of gold and silver is
due, I repeat, to the fact that, thanks to their metallic properties, to
the difficulties of their production, and above all to the intervention
of state authority, they early won stability and authenticity as
commodities.”

To say that, of all commodities, gold and silver were the first to have
their value constituted, is to say, after all that has gone before, that
gold and silver were the first to attain the status of money. This is M.
Proudhon’s great revelation, this is the truth that none had discovered
before him.

If, by these words, M. Proudhon means that of all commodities, gold and
silver are the ones whose time of production was known the earliest,
this would be yet another of the suppositions with which he is so ready
to regale his readers. If we wished to harp on this patriarchal
erudition, we would inform M. Proudhon that it was the time needed to
produce objects of prime necessity, such as iron, etc., which was the
first to be known. We shall spare him Adam Smith’s classic bow.

But, after all that, how can M. Proudhon go on talking about the
constitution of a value, since a value is never constituted by itself?
It is constituted, not by the time needed to produce it by itself, but
in relation to the quota of each and every other product which can be
created in the same time. Thus the constitution of the value of gold and
silver presupposes an already completed constitution of a number of
other products.

It is then not the commodity that has attained, in gold and silver, the
status of “constituted value,” it is M. Proudhon’s “constituted value”
that has attained, in gold and silver, the status of money.

Let us now make a closer examination of these “economic reasons” which,
according to M. Proudhon, have bestowed upon gold and silver the
advantage of being raised to the status of money sooner than other
products, thanks to their having passed through the constitutive phase
of value.

These economic reasons are: the “visible tendency to become dominant,”
the “marked preferences” even in the “patriarchal period,” and other
circumlocutions about the actual fact – which increase the difficulty,
since they multiply the fact by multiplying the incidents which M.
Proudhon brings in to explain the fact. M. Proudhon has not yet
exhausted all the so-called economic reasons. Here is one of sovereign,
irresistible force:

“Money is born of sovereign consecration: the sovereigns take possession
of gold and silver and affix their seal to them.” (Vol. I, p. 69)

Thus, the whim of sovereigns is for M. Proudhon the highest reason in
political economy.

Truly, one must be destitute of all historical knowledge not to know
that it is the sovereigns who in all ages have been subject to economic
conditions, but they have never dictated laws to them. Legislation,
whether political or civil, never does more than proclaim, express in
words, the will of economic relations.

Was it the sovereign who took possession of gold and silver to make them
the universal agents of exchange by affixing his seal to them? Or was it
not, rather, these universal agents of exchange which took possession of
the sovereign and forced him to affix his seal to them and thus give
them a political consecration?

The impress which was and is still given to money is not that of its
value but of its weight. The stability and authenticity M. Proudhon
speaks of apply only to the standard of the money; and this standard
indicates how much metallic matter there is in a coined piece of money.

“The sole intrinsic value of a silver mark,” says Voltaire, with his
habitual good sense, “is a mark of silver, half a pound weighing eight
ounces. The weight and the standard alone form this intrinsic value.”
(Voltaire, _Système de Law_)

[Marx quotes a chapter from Voltaire’s Historie de parlement. It is
entitled “France in the Period of the Regency and Law’s System.”]

But the question: how much is an ounce of gold or silver worth, remains
nonetheless. If a cashmere from the Grand Colbert stores bore the
trademark pure wool, this trademark would not tell you the value of the
cashmere. There would still remain the question: how much is wool worth?

“Philip I, King of France,” says M. Proudhon, “mixes with Charlemagne’s
gold pound a third of alloy, imagining that, having the monopoly of the
manufacture of money, he could do what is done by every tradesman who
has the monopoly of a product. What was actually this debasement of the
currency from which Philip and his successors have been so much blamed?
It was perfectly sound reasoning from the point of view of commercial
practice, but very unsound economic science, viz., to suppose that, as
supply and demand regulate value, it is possible, either by producing an
artificial scarcity or by monopolizing manufacture, to increase the
estimation and consequently the value of things; and that this is true
of gold and silver as of corn, wine, oil or tobacco. But Philip’s fraud
was no sooner suspected than his money was reduced to its true value,
and he himself lost what he had thought to gain from his subjects. The
same thing has happened as a result of every similar attempt.” (Vol. I,
pp. 70-71)

It has been proved times without number that, if a prince takes into his
head to debase the currency, it is he who loses. What he gains once at
the first issue he loses every time the falsified coinage returns to him
in the form of taxes, etc. But Philip and his successors were able to
protect themselves more or less against this loss, for, once the debased
coinage was put into circulation, they hastened to order a general
re-minting of money on the old footing.

And besides, if Philip I had really reasoned like M. Proudhon, he would
not have reasoned well “from the commercial point of view.” Neither
Philip I nor M. Proudhon displays any mercantile genius in imagining
that it is possible to alter the value of gold as well as that of every
other commodity merely because their value is determined by the relation
between supply and demand.

If King Philip had decreed that one quarter of corn was in future to be
called two quarters of wheat, he would have been a swindler. He would
have deceived all the _rentiers,_ all the people who were entitled to
receive 100 quarters of corn. He would have been the cause of all these
people receiving only 50 quarters of corn; he would have had to pay only
50. But in commerce 100 such quarters would never have been worth more
than 50. By changing the name we do not change the thing. The quantity
of corn, whither supplied or demanded, will be neither decreased nor
increased by this mere change of name. Thus, the relation between supply
and demand being just the same in spite of this change of name, the
price of corn will undergo no real change. When we speak of the supply
and demand of things, we do not speak of the supply and demand of the
name of things. Philip I was not a maker of gold and silver, as M.
Proudhon says; he was a maker of names for coins. Pass off your French
cashmeres as Asiatic cashmeres, and you may deceive a buyer or two; but
once the fraud becomes known, your so-called Asiatic cashmeres will drop
to the price of French cashmeres. When he put a false label on gold and
silver, King Philip could deceive only so long as the fraud was not
known. Like any other shopkeeper, he deceived his customers by a false
description of his wares, which could not last for long. He was bound
sooner or later to suffer the rigour of commercial laws. Is this what M.
Proudhon wanted to prove? No. According to him, it is from the sovereign
and not from commerce that money gets its value. And what has he really
proved? That commerce is more sovereign than the sovereign. Let the
sovereign decree that one mark shall in future be two marks, commerce
will keep on saying that these two marks are worth no more than one mark
was formerly.

But, for all that, the question of value determined by the quantity of
labour has not been advanced a step. It still remains to be decided
whether the value of these two marks (which have become what one mark
was once) is determined by the cost of production or by the law of
supply and demand.

M. Proudhon continues:

“It should even be borne in mind that if, instead of debasing the
currency, it had been in the king’s power to double its bulk, the
exchange value of gold and silver would immediately have dropped by
half, always from reasons of proportion and equilibrium.” (Vol. I, p.
71)

If this opinion, which M. Proudhon shares with the other economists, is
valid, it argues in favour of the latter’s doctrine of supply and
demand, and in no way in favour of M. Proudhon’s proportionality. For,
whatever the quantity of labour embodied in the doubled bulk of gold and
silver, its value would have dropped by half, the demand having remained
the same and the supply having doubled. Or can it be, by any chance,
that the “law of proportionality” would have become confused this time
with the so much disdained law of supply and demand? This true
proportion of M. Proudhon’s is indeed so elastic, is capable of so many
variations, combinations and permutations, that it might well coincide
for once with the relation between supply and demand.

To make “every commodity acceptable in exchange, if not in practice then
at least by right,” on the basis of the role of gold and silver is,
then, to misunderstand this role. Gold and silver are acceptable by law
only because they are acceptable in practice; and they are acceptable in
practice because the present organization of production needs a
universal medium of exchange. Law is only the official recognition of
fact.

We have seen that the example of money as an application of value which
has attained constitution was chosen by M. Proudhon only to smuggle
through his whole doctrine of exchangeability, that is to say, to prove
that every commodity assessed by its cost of production must attain the
status of money. All this would be very fine, were it not for the
awkward fact that precisely gold and silver, as money, are of all
commodities the only ones not determined by their cost of production;
and this is so true that in circulation they can be replaced by paper.
So long as there is a certain proportion observed between the
requirements of circulation and the amount of money issued, be it paper,
gold, platinum, or copper money, there can be no question of a
proportion to be observed between the intrinsic value (cost of
production) and the nominal value of money. Doubtless, in international
trade, money is determined, like any other commodity, by labour time.
But it is also true that gold and silver in international trade are
means of exchange as products and not as money. In other words, they
lose this characteristic of “stability and authenticity,” of “sovereign
consecration,” which, for M. Proudhon, forms their specific
characteristic. Ricardo understood the truth so well that, after basing
his whole system on value determined by labour time, and after saying:
“_Gold and silver_, like all other commodities, are valuable only in
proportion to the quantity of labour necessary to produce them, and
bring them to market,”

He adds, nevertheless, that the value of money is not determined by the
labour time its substance embodies, but by the law of supply and demand
only.

“Though it [paper money] has no intrinsic value, yet, by limiting its
quantity, its value in exchange is as great as an equal denomination of
coin, or of bullion in that coin. On the same principle, too, namely, by
limitation of its quantity, a debased coin would circulate at the value
it should bear, if it were of the legal weight and fineness, and not at
the value of the quantity of metal which it actually contained. In the
history of the British coinage, we find, accordingly, that the currency
was never depreciated in the same proportion that it was debased; the
reason of which was, that it never was increased in quantity, in
proportion to its diminished intrinsic value.” (Ricardo, loc. cit., pp.
206-07)

This is what J. B. Say observes on this passage of Ricardo’s:

“This example should suffice, I think, to convince the author that the
basis of all value is not the amount of labour needed to make a
commodity, but the need felt for that commodity, balanced by its
scarcity.” [The reference is to Say’s note on the French edition of
Ricardo’s book, Vol. II, pp. 206-07.]

Thus money, which for Ricardo is no longer a value determined by labour
time, and which J. B. Say therefore takes as an example to convince
Ricardo that the other values could not be determined by labour time
either, this money, I say, taken by J. B. Say as an example of a value
determined exclusively by supply and demand, becomes for M. Proudhon the
example par excellence of the application of value constituted... by
labour time.

To conclude, if money is not a value “constituted” by labour time, it is
all the less likely that it could have anything in common with M.
Proudhon’s true “proportion.” Gold and silver are always exchangeable,
because they have the special function of serving as the universal agent
of exchange, and in no wise because they exist in a quantity
proportional to the sum total of wealth; or, to put it still better,
they are always proportional because, alone of all commodities, they
serve as money, the universal agent of exchange, whatever their quantity
in relation to the sum total of wealth.

“A circulation can never be so abundant as to overflow; for by
diminishing its value, in the same proportion you will increase its
quantity, and by increasing its value, diminish its quantity.” (Ricardo,
Vol. II, p. 205)

“What an imbroglio this political economy is!” cries M. Proudhon. (Vol.
I, p. 72)

“Cursed gold!” cries a Communist flippantly [through the mouth of M.
Proudhon]. You might as well say: “Cursed wheat, cursed vines, cursed
sheep! – for just like gold and silver, every commercial value must
attain its strictly exact determination.” (Vol. I, p. 73)

The idea of making sheep and vines attain the status of money is not
new. In France, it belongs to the age of Louis XIV. At that period,
money having begun to establish its omnipotence, the depreciation of all
other commodities was being complained of, and the time when “every
commercial value” might attain its strictly exact determination, the
status of money, was being eagerly invoked. Even in the writings of
Boisguillebert, one of the oldest of French economists, we find:

“Money, then, by the arrival of innumerable competitors in the form of
commodities themselves, re-established in their true values, will be
thrust back again within its natural limits.” (Économistes financiers du
dix-huitième siècle, Daire edition, p. 422)

One sees that the first illusions of the bourgeoisie are also their
last.

B) Surplus Labour

“In works on political economy we read this absurd hypothesis: _If the
price of everything were doubled_.... As if the price of everything were
not the proportion of things – and one could double a proportion, a
relation, a law!” (Proudhon, Vol. I, p. 81)

Economists have fallen into this error through not knowing how to apply
the “law of proportionality” and of “constituted value.”

Unfortunately in the very same work by M. Proudhon, Volume I, p. 110, we
read the absurd hypothesis that, “if wages rose generally, the price of
everything else would rise.” Furthermore, if we find the phrase in
question in works on political economy, we also find as explanation of
it.

“When one speaks of the price of all commodities going up or down, one
always excludes some one commodity going up or down. The excluded
commodity is, in general, money or labour.” (Encyclopedia Metropolitana
or Universal Dictionary of Knowledge, Vol. IV, Article “Political
Economy,” by N. W. Senior, London, 1836. Regarding the phrase under
discussion, see also J. St. Mill: Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of
Political Economy, London, 1844, and Tooke: A History of Prices, etc.,
London, 1838.) [Full reference is Th. Tooke, A History of Prices, and of
the State of the Circulation, from 1793 to 1837, Vols. I-II, London,
1838]

Let us pass now to the second application of “constituted value,” and of
other proportions – whose only defect is their lack of proportion. And
let us see whether M. Proudhon is happier here than in the
monetarization of sheep.

“An axiom generally admitted by economists is that all labour must leave
a surplus. In my opinion this proposition is universally and absolutely
true: it is the corollary of the law of proportion, which may be
regarded as the summary of the whole of economic science. But, if the
economists will permit me to say so, the principle that all labour must
leave a surplus is meaningless according to their theory, and is not
susceptible of any demonstration.” (Proudhon, Vol. I, p. 73)

To prove that all labour must leave a surplus, M. Proudhon personifies
society; he turns it into a person, Society – a society which is not by
any means a society of persons, since it has its law apart, which have
nothing in common with the persons of which society is composed, and its
“own intelligence,” which is not the intelligence of common men, but an
intelligence devoid of common sense. M. Proudhon reproaches the
economists with not having understood the personality of this collective
being. We have pleasure in confronting him with the following passage
from an American economist, who accuses the economists of just the
opposite:

“The moral entity – the grammatical being called a nation, has been
clothed in attributes that have no real existence except in the
imagination of those who metamorphose a word into a thing.... This has
given rise to many difficulties and to some deplorable misunderstanding
in political economy.” (Th. Cooper, Lectures on the Elements of
Political Economy, Colombia,1826) [The first edition of the book was
published in Colombia in 1826. A second, enlarged edition appeared in
London in 1831.]

“This principle of surplus labour,” continues M. Proudhon, “is true of
individuals only because it emanates from society, which thus confers on
them the benefit of its own laws.” (Vol. I, p. 75)

Does M. Proudhon mean thereby merely that the production of the social
individual exceeds that of the isolated individual? Is M. Proudhon
referring to this excess of the production of associated individuals
over that of non-associated individuals? If so, we could quote for him a
hundred economists who have expressed this simple truth without any of
the mysticism with which M. Proudhon surrounds himself. This, for
example, is what Mr. Sadler says:

“Combined labour produces results which individual exertion could never
accomplish. As mankind, therefore, multiply in number, the products of
their united industry would greatly exceed the amount of any mere
arithmetical addition calculated on such an increase.... In the
mechanical arts, as well as in pursuits of science, a man may achieve
more in a day... than a solitary... individual could perform in his
whole life.... Geometry says... that the whole is only equal to the sum
of all its parts; as applied to the subject before us, this axiom would
be false. Regarding labour, the great pillar of human existence, it may
be said that the entire product of combined exertion almost infinitely
exceeds all which individual and disconnected efforts could possibly
accomplish.” (T. Sadler, The Law of Population, Vol. I, pp. 83 and 84,
London, 1830)

To return to M. Proudhon. Surplus labour, he says, is explained by the
person, Society. The life of this person is guided by laws, the opposite
of those which govern the activities of man as an individual. He desires
to prove this by “facts.”

“The discovery of an economic process can never provide the inventor
with a profit equal to that which he procures for society.... It has
been remarked that railway enterprises are much less a source of wealth
for the contractors than for the state.... The average cost of
transporting commodities by road is 18 centimes per ton per kilometre,
from the collection of the goods to their delivery. It has been
calculated that at this rate an ordinary railway enterprise would not
obtain 10 per cent net profit, a result approximately equal to that of a
road-transport enterprise. But let us suppose that the speed of rail
transport compared with that of road transport is as 4 is to 1. Since in
society time is value itself, the railway would, prices being equal,
present an advantage of 400 per cent over road-transport. Yet this
enormous advantage, very real for society, is far from being realized in
the same proportion for the carrier, who, while bestowing upon society
an extra value of 400 per cent, does not for his own part draw 10 per
cent. To bring the matter home still more pointedly, let us suppose, in
fact, that the railway puts up its rate to 25 centimes, the cost of road
transport remaining at 18: it would instantly lose all its consignments.
Senders, receivers, everybody would return to the van, to the primitive
waggon if necessary. The locomotive would be abandoned. A social
advantage of 400 per cent would be sacrificed to a private loss of 35
per cent. The reason for this is easily grasped: the advantage resulting
from the speed of the railway is entirely social, and each individual
participates in it only in a minute proportion (it must be remembered
that at the moment we are dealing only with the transport of goods),
while the loss strikes the consumer directly and personally. A social
profit equal to 400 represents for the individual, if society is
composed only of a million men, four ten-thousandths; while a loss of 33
per cent for the consumer would suppose a social deficit of 33 million.”
(Proudhon Vol. I, p. 75-76)

Now, we may even overlook the fact that M. Proudhon expresses a
quadrupled speed as 400 per cent of the original speed; but that he
should bring into relation the percentage of speed and the percentage of
profit and establish a proportion between two relations which, although
measured separately by percentages, are nevertheless incommensurate with
each other, is to establish a proportion between the percentages without
reference to denominations.

Percentages are always percentages, 10 per cent and 400 per cent are
commensurable; they are to each other as 10 is to 400. Therefore,
concludes M. Proudhon, a profit of 10 per cent is worth 40 times less
than a quadrupled speed. To save appearances, he says that, for society,
time is money. This error arises from his recollecting vaguely that
there is a connexion between labour value and labour time, and he
hastens to identify labour time with transport time; that is, he
identifies the few firemen, drivers and others, whose labour time is
actually transport time, with the whole of society. Thus at one blow,
speed has become capital, and in this case he is fully right in saying:
“A profit of 400 per cent will be sacrificed to a loss of 35 per cent.”
After establishing this strange proposition as a mathematician, he gives
us the explanation of it as an economist.

“A social profit equal to 400 represents for the individual, in a
society of only a million men, four ten-thousandths.” Agreed; but we are
dealing not with 400, but with 400 per cent, and a profit of 400 per
cent represents for the individual 400 per cent, neither more nor less.
Whatever be the capital, the dividends will always be in the ratio of
400 per cent. What does M. Proudhon do? He takes percentages for
capital, and, as if he were afraid of his confusion not being manifest
enough, “pointed” enough, he continues:

“A loss of 33 per cent for the consumer would suppose a social deficit
of 33 million.” A loss of 33 per cent for the consumer remains a loss of
33 per cent for a million consumers. How then can M. Proudhon say
pertinently that the social deficit in the case of a 33 per cent loss
amounts to 33 million, when he knows neither the social capital nor even
the capital of a single one of the persons concerned? Thus it was not
enough for M. Proudhon to have confused capital with percentage; he
surpasses himself by identifying the capital sunk in an enterprise with
the number of interested parties.

“To bring the matter home still more pointedly let us suppose in fact” a
given capital. A social profit of 400 per cent divided among a million
participants, each of them interested to the extent of one franc, would
give 4 francs profit per head – and not 0.0004, as M. Proudhon alleges.
Likewise a loss of 33 per cent for each of the participants represents a
social deficit of 330,000 francs and not of 33 million (100:33 =
1,000,000:330,000).

M. Proudhon, preoccupied with his theory of the person, Society, forgets
to divide by 100, which entails a loss of 330,000 francs; but 4 francs
profit per head make 4 million francs profit for society. There remains
for society a net profit of 3,670,000 francs. This accurate calculation
proves precisely the contrary of what M. Proudhon wanted to prove:
namely, that the profits and losses of society are not in inverse ratio
to the profits and losses of individuals.

Having rectified these simple errors of pure calculation, let us take a
look at the consequences which we would arrive at, if we admitted this
relation between speed and capital in the case of railways, as M.
Proudhon gives it – minus the mistakes in calculation. Let us suppose
that a transport four times as rapid costs four times as much; this
transport would not yield less profit than cartage, which is four times
slower and costs a quarter the amount. Thus, if cartage takes 18
centimes, rail transport could take 72 centimes. This would be,
according to “the rigor of mathematics,” the consequence of M.
Proudhon’s suppositions – always minus his mistakes in calculation. But
here he is all of a sudden telling us that if, instead of 72 centimes,
rail transport takes only 25, it would instantly lose all its
consignments. Decidedly we should have to go back to the van, to the
primitive waggon even. Only, if we have any advice to give M. Proudhon,
it is not to forget, in his Programme of the Progressive Association, to
divide by 100. But, alas! it is scarcely to be hoped that our advice
will be listened to, for M. Proudhon is so delighted with his
“progressive association,” that he cries most emphatically:

“I have already shown in Chapter II, by the solution of the antinomy of
value, that the advantage of every useful discovery is incomparably less
for the inventor, whatever he may do, than for society. I have carried
the demonstration in regard to this point in the rigor of mathematics!”

Let us return to the fiction of the person, Society, a fiction which has
no other aim than that of proving this simple truth – that a new
invention which enables a given amount of labour to produce a greater
number of commodities, lowers the marketable value of the product.
Society, then, makes a profit, not by obtaining more exchange values,
but by obtaining more commodities for the same value. As for the
inventor, competition makes his profit fall successively to the general
level of profits. Has M. Proudhon proved this proposition as he wanted
to? No. This does not prevent him from reproaching the economists with
failure to prove it. To prove to him on the contrary that they have
proved it, we shall cite only Ricardo and Lauderdale – Ricardo, the head
of the school which determines value by labour time, and Lauderdale, one
of the most uncompromising defenders of the determination of value by
supply and demand. Both have expounded the same proposition:

“By constantly increasing the facility of production, we constantly
diminish the value of some of the commodities before produced, though by
the same means we not only add to the national riches, but also to the
power of future production.... As soon as by the aid of machinery, or by
the knowledge of natural philosophy, you oblige natural agents to do the
work which was before done by man, the exchangeable value of such work
falls accordingly. If 10 men turned a corn mill, and it be discovered
that by the assistance of wind, or of water, the labour of these 10 men
may be spared, the flour which is the produce partly of the work
performed by the mill, would immediately fall in value, in proportion to
the quantity of labour saved; and the society would be richer by the
commodities which the labour of the 10 men could produce, the funds
destined for their maintenance being in no degree impaired.” (Ricardo
Vol. II, p. 59)

Lauderdale, in his turn, says:

“In every instance where capital is so employed as to produce a profit,
it uniformly arises, either – from its supplanting a portion of labour,
which would otherwise be performed by the hand of man; or – from its
performing a portion of labour, which is beyond the reach of the
personal exertion of man to accomplish. The small profit which the
proprietors of machinery generally acquire, when compared with the wages
of labour, which the machine supplants, may perhaps create a suspicion
of the rectitude of this opinion. Some fire-engines, for instance, draw
more water from a coalpit in one day than could be conveyed on the
shoulder of 300 men, even assisted by the machinery of buckets; and a
fire-engine undoubtedly performs its labour at a much smaller expense
than the amount of the wages of those whose labour it thus supplants.
This is, in truth, the case with all machinery. All machines must
execute the labour that was antecedently performed at a cheaper rate
than it could be done by the hand of man.... If such a privilege is
given for the invention of a machine, which performs, by the labour of
one man, a quantity of work that used to take the labour of four; as the
possession of the exclusive privilege prevents any competition in doing
the work, but what proceeds from the labour of the workmen, their wages,
as long as the patent continues, must obviously form the measure of the
patentee’s charge; that is to secure employment, he has only to charge a
little less than the wages of the labour which the machine supplants.
But when the patent expires, other machines of the same nature are
brought into competition; and then his charge must be regulated on the
same principle as every other, according to the abundance of
machines.... The profit of capital employed..., though it arises from
supplanting labour, comes to be regulated, not by the value of the
labour it supplants but, as in all other cases, by the competition among
the proprietors of capital that presents itself for performing the duty,
and the demand for it.” (Pp. 119, 123, 124, 125, 134)

Finally, then, so long as the profit is greater than in other
industries, capital will be thrown into the new industry until the rate
of profit falls to the general level.

We have just seen that the example of the railway was scarcely suited to
throw any light on his fiction of the person, Society. Nevertheless, M.
Proudhon boldly resumes his discourse:

“With these points cleared up, nothing is easier than to explain how
labour must leave a surplus for each producer.” (Vol. I, p. 77)

What now follows belongs to classical antiquity. It is a poetical
narrative intended to refresh the reader after the fatigue which the
rigor of the preceding mathematical demonstrations must have caused him.
M. Proudhon gives the person, Society, the name of Prometheus, whose
high deeds he glorifies in these terms:

“First of all, Prometheus emerging from the bosom of nature awakens to
life, in a delightful inertia, etc., etc. Prometheus sets to work, and
on this first day, the first day of the second creation, Prometheus’
product, that is, his wealth, his well-being, is equal to 10. On the
second day, Prometheus divides his labour, and his product becomes equal
to 100. On the third day and on each of the following days, Prometheus
invents machines, discovers new utilities in bodies, new forces in
nature.... With every step of his industrial activity, there is an
increase in the number of his products, which marks an enhancement of
happiness for him. And since, after all, to consume is for him to
produce, it is clear that every day’s consumption, using up only the
product of the day before, leaves a surplus product for the next day.”
(Vol. I, pp. 77-78)

This Prometheus of M. Proudhon’s is a queer character, as weak in logic
as in political economy. So long as Prometheus merely teaches us the
division of labour, the application of machinery, the exploitation of
natural forces and scientific power, multiplying the productive forces
of men and giving a surplus compared with the produce of labour in
isolation, this new Prometheus has the misfortune only of coming too
late. But the moment Prometheus starts talking about production and
consumption he becomes really ludicrous. To consume, for him, is to
produce; he consumes the next day what he produced the day before, so
that he is always one day in advance; this day in advance is his
“surplus labour.” But, if he consumes the next day what he has produced
the day before, he must, on the first day, which had no day before, have
done two days’ work in order to be one day in advance later on. How did
Prometheus earn this surplus on the first day, when there was neither
division of labour, nor machinery, nor even any knowledge of physical
forces other than fire? Thus the question, for all its being carried
back “to the first day of the second creation,” has not advanced a
single step forward. This way of explaining things savours both of Greek
and of Hebrew, it is at once mystical and allegorical. It gives M.
Proudhon a perfect right to say:

“I have proved by theory and by facts the principle that all labour must
have a surplus.”

The “facts” are the famous progressive calculation; the theory is the
myth of Prometheus.

“But,” continues M. Proudhon, “this principle, while being as certain as
an arithmetical proposition, is as yet far from being realized by
everyone. Whereas, with the progress of collective industry, every day’s
individual labour produces a greater and greater product, and whereas
therefore, by a necessary consequence, the worker with the same wage
ought to become richer every day, there actually exist estates in
society which profit and others which decay.” (Vol. I, pp. 79-80)

In 1770 the population of the United Kingdom of Great Britain was 15
million, and the productive population was 3 million. The scientific
power of production equalled a population of about 12 million
individuals more. Therefore there were, altogether, 15 million of
productive forces. Thus the productive power was to the population as 1
is to 1; and the scientific power was to the manual power as 4 is to 1.

In 1840 the population did not exceed 30 million: the productive
population was 6 million. But the scientific power amounted to 650
million; that is, it was to the whole population as 21 is to 1, and to
manual power as 108 is to 1.

In English society the working day thus acquired in 70 years a surplus
of 2,700 per cent productivity; that is, in 1840 it produced 27 times as
much as in 1770. According to M. Proudhon, the following question should
be raised: why was not the English worker of 1840 27 times as rich as
the one of 1770? In raising such a question one would naturally be
supposing that the English could have produced this wealth without the
historical conditions in which it was produced, such as: private
accumulation of capital, modern division of labour, automatic workshops,
anarchical competition, the wage system – in short, everything that is
based upon class antagonism. Now, these were precisely the necessary
conditions of existence for the development of productive forces and of
surplus labour. Therefore, to obtain this development of productive
forces and this surplus labour, there had to be classes which profited
and classes which decayed.

What then, ultimately, is this Prometheus resuscitated by M. Proudhon?
It is society, social relations based on class antagonism. These
relations are not relations between individual and individual, but
between worker and capitalist, between farmer and landlord, etc. Wipe
out these relations and you annihilate all society, and your Prometheus
is nothing but a ghost without arms or legs; that is, without automatic
workshops, without division of labour – in a word, without everything
that you gave him to start with in order to make him obtain this surplus
labour.

If then, in theory, it sufficed to interpret, as M. Proudhon does, the
formula of surplus labour in the equalitarian sense, without taking into
account the actual conditions of production, it should suffice, in
practice, to share out equally among the workers all the wealth at
present acquired, without changing in any way the present conditions of
production. Such a distribution would certainly not assure a high degree
of comfort to the individual participants.

But M. Proudhon is not so pessimistic as one might think. As proportion
is everything for him, he has to see in his fully equipped Prometheus,
that is, in present-day society, the beginnings of a realization of his
favourite idea.

“But everywhere, too, the progress of wealth, that is, the proportion of
values, is the dominant law; and when economists hold up against the
complaints of the social party the progressive growth of the public
wealth, and the improved conditions of even the most unfortunate
classes, they unwittingly proclaim a truth which is the condemnation of
their theories.” (Vol. I, p. 80)

What is, exactly, collective wealth, public fortune? It is the wealth of
the bourgeoisie – not that of each bourgeois in particular. Well, the
economists have done nothing but show how, in the existing relations of
production, the wealth of the bourgeoisie has grown and must grow still
further. As for the working classes, it still remains a very debatable
question whether their condition has improved as a result of the
increase in so-called public wealth. If economists, in support of their
optimism, cite the example of the English workers employed in the cotton
industry, they see the condition of the latter only in the rare moments
of trade prosperity. These moments of prosperity are to the periods of
crisis and stagnation in the “true proportion” of 3 to 10. But perhaps
also, in speaking of improvement, the economists were thinking of the
millions of workers who had to perish in the East Indies so as to
procure for the million and a half workers employed in England in the
same industry three years’ prosperity out of ten.

As for the temporary participation in the increase of public wealth,
that is a different matter. The fact of temporary participation is
explained by the theory of the economists. It is the confirmation of
this theory and not its “condemnation,” as M. Proudhon calls it. If
there were anything to be condemned, it would surely be the system of M.
Proudhon, who would reduce the worker, as we have shown, to the minimum
wage, in spite of the increase of wealth. It is only by reducing the
worker to the minimum wage that he would be able to apply the true
proportion of values, of “value constituted” by labour time. It is
because wages, as a result of competition, oscillate now above, now
below, the price of food necessary for the sustenance of the worker,
that he can participate to a certain extent in the development of
collective wealth, and can also perish from want. This is the whole
theory of the economists who have no illusions on the subject.

After his lengthy digressions on railways, on Prometheus, and on the new
society to be reconstituted on “constituted value,” M. Proudhon collects
himself; emotion overpowers him and he cries in fatherly tones:

“I _beseech_ the economists to ask themselves for one moment, in the
silence of their hearts – far from the prejudices that trouble them and
regardless of the employment they are engaged in or hope to obtain, of
the interests they subserve, or the approbation to which they aspire, of
the honours which nurse their vanity – let them say whether before this
day the principle that all labour must leave a surplus appeared to them
with this chain of premises and consequences that we have revealed.”
(Vol. I, p. 80)


Chapter Two: The Metaphysics of Political Economy

§ 1. The Method

Here we are, right in Germany! We shall now have to talk metaphysics
while talking political economy. And in this again we shall but follow
M. Proudhon’s “contradictions.” Just now he forced us to speak English,
to become pretty well English ourselves. Now the scene is changing. M.
Proudhon is transporting us to our dear fatherland and is forcing us,
whether we like it or not, to become German again.

If the Englishman transforms men into hats, the German transforms hats
into ideas. The Englishman is Ricardo, rich banker and distinguished
economist; the German is Hegel, simple professor at the University of
Berlin.

Louis XV, the last absolute monarch and representative of the decadence
of French royalty, had attached to his person a physician who was
himself France’s first economist. This doctor, this economist,
represented the imminent and certain triumph of the French bourgeoisie.
Doctor Quesnay made a science out of political economy; he summarized it
in his famous Tableau économique. Besides the thousand and one
commentaries on this table which have appeared, we possess one by the
doctor himself. It is the _Analysis of the Economic Table_ followed by
“seven _important observations_.”

M. Proudhon is another Dr. Quesnay. He is the Quesnay of the metaphysics
of political economy.

Now metaphysics – indeed all philosophy – can be summed up, according to
Hegel, in method. We must, therefore, try to elucidate the method of M.
Proudhon, which is at least as foggy as the _Economic Table_. It is for
this reason that we are making seven more or less important
observations. If Dr. Proudhon is not pleased with our observations,
well, then, he will have to become an Abbe Baydeau and give the
“explanation of the economico-metaphysical method” himself.

First Observation

“We are not giving a history according to the order in time, but
according to the sequence of ideas. Economic phases or categories are in
their manifestation sometimes contemporary, sometimes inverted....
Economic theories have nonetheless their logical sequence and their
serial relation in the understanding: it is this order that we flatter
our- selves to have discovered.” (Proudhon, Vol. I, p. 146)

M. Proudhon most certainly wanted to frighten the French by flinging
quasi-Hegelian phrases at them. So we have to deal with two men: firstly
with M. Proudhon, and then with Hegel. How does M. Proudhon distinguish
himself from other economists? And what part does Hegel play in M.
Proudhon’s political economy?

Economists express the relations of bourgeois production, the division
of labour, credit, money, etc., as fixed, immutable, eternal categories.
M. Proudhon, who has these ready-made categories before him, wants to
explain to us the act of formation, the genesis of these categories,
principles, laws, ideas, thoughts.

Economists explain how production takes place in the above-mentioned
relations, but what they do not explain is how these relations
themselves are produced, that is, the historical movement which gave
them birth. M. Proudhon, taking these relations for principles,
categories, abstract thoughts, has merely to put into order these
thoughts, which are to be found alphabetically arranged at the end of
every treatise on political economy. The economists’ material is the
active, energetic life of man; M. Proudhon’s material is the dogmas of
the economists. But the moment we cease to pursue the historical
movement of production relations, of which the categories are but the
theoretical expression, the moment we want to see in these categories no
more than ideas, spontaneous thoughts, independent of real relations, we
are forced to attribute the origin of these thoughts to the movement of
pure reason. How does pure, eternal, impersonal reason give rise to
these thoughts? How does it proceed in order to produce them?

If we had M. Proudhon’s intrepidity in the matter of Hegelianism we
should say: it is distinguished in itself from itself. What does this
mean? Impersonal reason, having outside itself neither a base on which
it can pose itself, nor an object to which it can oppose itself, nor a
subject with which it can compose itself, is forced to turn head over
heels, in posing itself, opposing itself and composing itself –
position, opposition, composition. Or, to speak Greek – we have thesis,
antithesis, and synthesis. For those who do not know the Hegelian
formula: affirmation, negation and negation of the negation. That is
what language means. It is certainly not Hebrew (with due apologies M.
Proudhon); but it is the language of this pure reason, separate from the
individual. Instead of the ordinary individual with his ordinary manner
of speaking and thinking we have nothing but this ordinary manner in
itself – without the individual.

Is it surprising that everything, in the final abstraction – for we have
here an abstraction, and not an analysis – presents itself as a logical
category? Is it surprising that, if you let drop little by little all
that constitutes the individuality of a house, leaving out first of all
the materials of which it is composed, then the form that distinguishes
it, you end up with nothing but a body; that, if you leave out of
account the limits of this body; you soon have nothing but a space –
that if, finally, you leave out of the account the dimensions of this
space, there is absolutely nothing left but pure quantity, the logical
category? If we abstract thus from every subject all the alleged
accidents, animate or inanimate, men or things, we are right in saying
that in the final abstraction, the only substance left is the logical
category. Thus the metaphysicians who, in making these abstractions,
think they are making analyses, and who, the more they detach themselves
from things, imagine themselves to be getting all the nearer to the
point of penetrating to their core – these metaphysicians in turn are
right in saying that things here below are embroideries of which the
logical categories constitute the canvas. This is what distinguishes the
philosopher from the Christian. The Christian, in spite of logic, has
only one incarnation of the Logos; the philosopher has never finished
with incarnations. If all that exists, all that lives on land, and under
water, can be reduced by abstraction to a logical category – if the
whole real world can be drowned thus in a world of abstractions, in the
world of logical categories – who need be astonished at it?

All that exists, all that lives on land and under water, exists and
lives only by some kind of movement. Thus, the movement of history
produces social relations; industrial movement gives us industrial
products, etc.

Just as by means of abstraction we have transformed everything into a
logical category, so one has only to make an abstraction of every
characteristic distinctive of different movements to attain movement in
its abstract condition – purely formal movement, the purely logical
formula of movement. If one finds in logical categories the substance of
all things, one imagines one has found in the logical formula of
movement the _absolute_ method, which not only explains all things, but
also implies the movement of things.

It is of this absolute method that Hegel speaks in these terms:

“Method is the absolute, unique, supreme, infinite force, which no
object can resist; it is the tendency of reason to find itself again, to
recognize itself in every object.” (Logic, Vol. III, p. 29)

All things being reduced to a logical category, and every movement,
every act of production, to method, it follows naturally that every
aggregate of products and production, of objects and of movement, can be
reduced to applied metaphysics. What Hegel has done for religion, law,
etc., M. Proudhon seeks to do for political economy.

So what is this absolute method? The abstraction of movement. What is
the abstraction of movement? Movement in abstract condition. What is
movement in abstract condition? The purely logical formula of movement
or the movement of pure reason. Wherein does the movement of pure reason
consist? In posing itself, opposing itself, composing itself; in
formulating itself as thesis, antithesis, synthesis; or, yet, in
affirming itself, negating itself, and negating its negation.

How does reason manage to affirm itself, to pose itself in a definite
category? That is the business of reason itself and of its apologists.

But once it has managed to pose itself as a thesis, this thesis, this
thought, opposed to itself, splits up into two contradictory thoughts –
the positive and the negative, the yes and no. The struggle between
these two antagonistic elements comprised in the antithesis constitutes
the dialectical movement. The yes becoming no, the no becoming yes, the
yes becoming both yes and no, the no becoming both no and yes, the
contraries balance, neutralize, paralyse each other. The fusion of these
two contradictory thoughts constitutes a new thought, which is the
synthesis of them. This thought splits up once again into two
contradictory thoughts, which in turn fuse into a new synthesis. Of this
travail is born a group of thoughts. This group of thoughts follows the
same dialectic movement as the simple category, and has a contradictory
group as antithesis. Of these two groups of thoughts is born a new group
of thoughts, which is the antithesis of them.

Just as from the dialectic movement of the simple categories is born the
group, so from the dialectic movement of the groups is born the series,
and from the dialectic movement of the series is born the entire system.

Apply this method to the categories of political economy and you have
the logic and metaphysics of political economy, or, in other words, you
have the economic categories that everybody knows, translated into a
little-known language which makes them look as if they had never
blossomed forth in an intellect of pure reason; so much do these
categories seem to engender one another, to be linked up and intertwined
with one another by the very working of the dialectic movement. The
reader must not get alarmed at these metaphysics with all their
_scaffolding_ of categories, groups, series, and systems. M. Proudhon,
in spite of all the trouble he has taken to scale the heights of the
system of contradictions, has never been able to raise himself above the
first two rungs of simple thesis and antithesis; and even these he has
mounted only twice, and on one of these two occasions he fell over
backwards.

Up to now we have expounded only the dialectics of Hegel. We shall see
later how M. Proudhon has succeeded in reducing it to the meanest
proportions. Thus, for Hegel, all that has happened and is still
happening is only just what is happening in his own mind. Thus the
philosophy of history is nothing but the history of philosophy, of his
own philosophy. There is no longer a “history according to the order in
time,” there is only “the sequence of ideas in the understanding.” He
thinks he is constructing the world by the movement of thought, whereas
he is merely reconstructing systematically and classifying by the
absolute method of thoughts which are in the minds of all.

Second Observation

Economic categories are only the theoretical expressions, the
abstractions of the social relations of production, M. Proudhon, holding
this upside down like a true philosopher, sees in actual relations
nothing but the incarnation of the principles, of these categories,
which were slumbering – so M. Proudhon the philosopher tells us – in the
bosom of the “impersonal reason of humanity.”

M. Proudhon the economist understands very well that men make cloth,
linen, or silk materials in definite relations of production. But what
he has not understood is that these definite social relations are just
as much produced by men as linen, flax, etc. Social relations are
closely bound up with productive forces. In acquiring new productive
forces men change their mode of production; and in changing their mode
of production, in changing the way of earning their living, they change
all their social relations. The hand-mill gives you society with the
feudal lord; the steam-mill, society with the industrial capitalist.

The same men who establish their social relations in conformity with the
material productivity, produce also principles, ideas, and categories,
in conformity with their social relations.

Thus the ideas, these categories, are as little eternal as the relations
they express. They are historical and transitory products.

There is a continual movement of growth in productive forces, of
destruction in social relations, of formation in ideas; the only
immutable thing is the abstraction of movement – _mors immortalis_.

[Marx quotes these words from the following passage of Lucretius’s poem
_On The Nature of Things_ (Book III, line 869): “_mortalem vitam mors
cum immortalis ademit”_ (“when mortal life has been taken away by
immortal death”).]

Third Observation

The production relations of every society form a whole. M. Proudhon
considers economic relations as so many social phases, engendering one
another, resulting one from the other like the antithesis from the
thesis, and realizing in their logical sequence the impersonal reason of
humanity.

The only drawback to this method is that when he comes to examine a
single one of these phases, M. Proudhon cannot explain it without having
recourse to all the other relations of society; which relations,
however, he has not yet made his dialectic movement engender. When,
after that, M. Proudhon, by means of pure reason, proceeds to give birth
to these other phases, he treats them as if they were new-born babes. He
forgets that they are of the same age as the first.

Thus, to arrive at the constitution of value, which for him is the basis
of all economic evolutions, he could not do without division of labour,
competition, etc. Yet in the series, in the understanding of M.
Proudhon, in the logical sequence, these relations did not yet exist.

In constructing the edifice of an ideological system by means of the
categories of political economy, the limbs of the social system are
dislocated. The different limbs of society are converted into so many
separate societies, following one upon the other. How, indeed, could the
single logical formula of movement, of sequence, of time, explain the
structure of society, in which all relations coexist simultaneously and
support one another?

Fourth Observation

Let us see now to what modifications M. Proudhon subjects Hegel’s
dialectics when he applies it to political economy.

For him, M. Proudhon, every economic category has two sides – one good,
the other bad. He looks upon these categories as the petty bourgeois
looks upon the great men of history: _Napoleon_ was a great man; he did
a lot of good; he also did a lot of harm.

The _good side_ and the _bad side_, the _advantages_ and _drawback_s,
taken together form for M. Proudhon the _contradiction_ in every
economic category.

The problem to be solved: to keep the good side, while eliminating the
bad.

_Slavery_ is an economic category like any other. Thus it also has its
two sides. Let us leave alone the bad side and talk about the good side
of slavery. Needless to say, we are dealing only with direct slavery,
with Negro slavery in Surinam, in Brazil, in the Southern States of
North America.

Direct slavery is just as much the pivot of bourgeois industry as
machinery, credits, etc. Without slavery you have no cotton; without
cotton you have no modern industry. It is slavery that gave the colonies
their value; it is the colonies that created world trade, and it is
world trade that is the precondition of large-scale industry. Thus
slavery is an economic category of the greatest importance.

Without slavery North America, the most progressive of countries, would
be transformed into a patriarchal country. Wipe North America off the
map of the world, and you will have anarchy – the complete decay of
modern commerce and civilization. Cause slavery to disappear and you
will have wiped America off the map of nations.[7]

Thus slavery, because it is an economic category, has always existed
among the institutions of the peoples. Modern nations have been able
only to disguise slavery in their own countries, but they have imposed
it without disguise upon the New World.

What would M. Proudhon do to save slavery? He would formulate the
problem thus: preserve the good side of this economic category,
eliminate the bad.

Hegel has no problems to formulate. He has only dialectics. M. Proudhon
has nothing of Hegel’s dialectics but the language. For him the
dialectic movement is the dogmatic distinction between good and bad.

Let us for a moment consider M. Proudhon himself as a category. Let us
examine his good and bad side, his advantages and his drawbacks.

If he has the advantage over Hegel of setting problems which he reserves
the right of solving for the greater good of humanity, he has the
drawback of being stricken with sterility when it is a question of
engendering a new category by dialectical birth-throes. What constitutes
dialectical movement is the coexistence of two contradictory sides,
their conflict and their fusion into a new category. The very setting of
the problem of eliminating the bad side cuts short the dialectic
movement. It is not the category which is posed and opposed to itself,
by its contradictory nature, it is M. Proudhon who gets excited,
perplexed and frets and fumes between the two sides of the category.

Caught thus in a blind alley, from which it is difficult to escape by
legal means, M. Proudhon takes a real flying leap which transports him
at one bound into a new category. Then it is that, to his astonished
gaze, is revealed the serial relation in the understanding.

He takes the first category that comes handy and attributes to it
arbitrarily the quality of supplying a remedy for the drawbacks of the
category to be purified. Thus, if we are to believe M. Proudhon, taxes
remedy the drawbacks of monopoly; the balance of trade, the drawbacks of
taxes; landed property, the drawbacks of credit.

By taking the economic categories thus successively, one by one, and
making one the antidote to the other, M. Proudhon manages to make with
this mixture of contradictions and antidotes to contradictions, two
volumes of contradictions, which he rightly entitles: _Le Système des
contradictions économiques_. [The System of Economic Contradictions]

Fifth Observation

“In the absolute reason all these ideas... are equally simple, and
general.... In fact, we attain knowledge only by a _sort of scaffolding_
of our ideas. But truth in itself is independent of these dialectical
symbols and freed from the combinations of our minds.” (Proudhon, Vol.
II, p. 97)

Here all of a sudden, by a kind of switch-over of which we now know the
secret, the metaphysics of political economy has become an illusion!
Never has M. Proudhon spoken more truly. Indeed, from the moment the
process of the dialectic movement is reduced to the simple process of
opposing good to bad, and of administering one category as an antidote
to another, the categories are deprived of all spontaneity; the idea
“ceases to function”; there is no life left in it. It is no longer posed
or decomposed into categories. The sequence of categories has become a
sort of _scaffolding_. Dialectics has ceased to be the movement of
absolute reason. There is no longer any dialectics but only, at the
most, absolutely pure morality.

When M. Proudhon spoke of the _serial relation in understanding_, of the
_logical sequence of categories_, he declared positively that he did not
want to give _history according to the order in time_, that is, in M.
Proudhon’s view, the historical sequence in which the categories have
manifested themselves. Thus for him everything happened in the pure
ether of reason. Everything was to be derived from this ether by means
of dialectics. Now that he has to put this dialectics into practice, his
reason is in default. M. Proudhon’s dialectics runs counter to Hegel’s
dialectics, and now we have M. Proudhon reduced to saying that the order
in which he gives the economic categories is no longer the order in
which they engender one another. Economic evolutions are no longer the
evolutions of reason itself.

What then does M. Proudhon give us? Real history, which is, according to
M. Proudhon’s understanding, the sequence in which the categories have
manifested themselves in order of time? No! History as it takes place in
the idea itself? Still less! That is, neither the profane history of
categories, nor their sacred history! What history does he give us then?
The history of his own contradictions. Let us see how they go, and how
they drag M. Proudhon in their train.

Before entering upon this examination, which gives rise to the sixth
important observation, we have yet another, less important observation
to make.

Let us admit with M. Proudhon that real history, history according to
the order in time, is the historical sequence in which ideas, categories
and principles have manifested themselves.

Each principle has had its own century in which to manifest itself. The
principle of authority, for example, had the 11th century, just as the
principle of individualism had the 18th century. In logical sequence, it
was the century that belonged to the principle, and not the principle
which belonged to the century. When, consequently, in order to save
principles as much as to save history, we ask ourselves why a particular
principle was manifested in the 11th century or in the 18th century
rather than in any other, we are necessarily forced to examine minutely
what men were like in the 11th century, what they were like in the 18th,
what were their respective needs, their productive forces, their mode of
production, the raw materials of their production – in short, what were
the relations between man and man which resulted from all these
conditions of existence. To get to the bottom of all these questions –
what is this but to draw up the real, profane history of men in every
century and to present these men as both the authors and the actors of
their own drama? But the moment you present men as the actors and
authors of their own history, you arrive – by detour – at the real
starting point, because you have abandoned those eternal principles of
which you spoke at the outset.

M. Proudhon has not even gone far enough along the crossroad which an
ideologist takes to reach the main road of history.

Sixth Observation

Let us take the sideroad with M. Proudhon.

We shall concede that economic relations, viewed as _immutable laws,
eternal principles, ideal categories_, existed before active and
energetic men did; we shall concede further that these laws, principles
and categories had, since the beginning of time, slumbered “in the
impersonal reason of humanity.” We have already seen that, with all
these changeless and motionless eternities, there is no history left;
there is at most history in the idea, that is, history reflected in the
dialectic movement of pure reason. M. Proudhon, by saying that, in the
dialectic movement ideas are no longer “differentiated,” has done away
with both the shadow of movement and the movement of shadows, by means
of which one could still have created at least a semblance of history.
Instead of that, he imputes to history his own impotence. He lays the
blame on everything, even the French language.

“It is not correct then,” says M. Proudhon, the philosopher, “to say
that something appears, that something is produced: in civilization as
in the universe, everything has existed, has acted, from eternity. This
applies to the whole of social economy.” (Vol. II, p. 102)

So great is the productive force of the contradictions which function
and which made M. Proudhon function, that, in trying to explain history,
he is forced to deny it; in trying to explain the successive appearance
of social relations, he denies that anything can appear: in trying to
explain production, with all its phases, he questions whether anything
can be produced!

Thus, for M. Proudhon, there is no longer any history: no longer any
sequence of ideas. And yet his book still exists; and it is precisely
that book which is, to use his own expression, “history according to the
sequence of ideas.” How shall we find a formula, for M. Proudhon is a
man of formulas, to help him to clear all these contradictions in one
leap?

To this end he has invented a new reason, which is neither the pure and
virgin absolute reason, nor the common reason of men living and acting
in different periods, but a reason quite apart – the reason of the
person, Society – of the subject, Humanity – which under the pen of M.
Proudhon figures at times also as “social genius,” “general reason,” or
finally as “human reason.” This reason, decked out under so many names,
betrays itself nevertheless, at every moment, as the individual reason
of M. Proudhon, with its good and its bad side, its antidotes and its
problems.

“Human reason does not create truth,” hidden in the depths of absolute,
eternal reason. It can only unveil it. But such truths as it has
unveiled up to now are incomplete, insufficient, and consequently
contradictory. Hence, economic categories, being themselves truths
discovered, revealed by human reason, by social genius, are equally
incomplete and contain within themselves the germ of contradictions.
Before M. Proudhon, social genius saw only the _antagonistic elements_,
and not the _synthetic formula_, both hidden simultaneously in absolute
reason. Economic relations, which merely realize on earth these
insufficient truths, these incomplete ideas, are consequently
contradictory in themselves, and present two sides, one good, the other
bad.

To find complete truth, the idea, in all its fullness, the synthetic
formula that is to annihilate the contradiction, this is the problem of
social genius. This again is why, in M. Proudhon’s illusion, this same
social genius has been harried from one category to another without ever
having been able, despite all its battery of categories, to snatch from
God or from absolute reason, a synthetic formula.

“At first, society” (social genius) “states a primary fact, puts forward
a hypothesis... a veritable antinomy, whose antagonistic results develop
in the social economy in the same way as its consequences could have
been deduced in the mind; so that industrial movement, following in all
things the deduction of ideas, splits up into two currents, one of
useful effects, the other of subversive results. To bring harmony into
the constitution of this two-side principle, and to solve this antinomy,
society gives rise to a second, which will soon be followed by a third;
and progress of social genius will take place in this manner, until,
having exhausted all its contradictions – I suppose, but it is not
proved that there is a limit to human contradictions – it returns in one
leap to all its former positions and with a single formula solves all
its problems.” (Vol. I, p. 133)

Just as the _antithesis_ was before turned into an _antidote_, so now
the _thesis_ becomes a _hypothesis_. This change of terms, coming from
M. Proudhon, has no longer anything surprising for us! Human reason,
which is anything but pure, having only incomplete vision, encounters at
every step new problems to be solved. Every new thesis which it
discovers in absolute reason and which is the negation of the first
thesis, becomes for it a synthesis, which it accepts rather naively as
the solution of the problem in question. It is thus that this reason
frets and fumes in ever renewing contradictions until, coming to the end
of the contradictions, it perceives that all its theses and syntheses
are merely contradictory hypotheses. In its perplexity, “human reason,
social genius, returns in one leap to all its former positions, and in a
single formula, solves all its problems.” This unique formula, by the
way, constitutes M. Proudhon’s true discovery. It is _constituted
value_.

Hypotheses are made only in view of a certain aim. The aim that social
genius, speaking through the mouth of M. Proudhon, set itself in the
first place, was to eliminate the bad in every economic category, in
order to have nothing left but the good. For it, the good, the supreme
well-being, the real practical aim, is equality. And why did the social
genius aim at equality rather than inequality, fraternity, Catholicism,
or any other principle? Because “humanity has successively realized so
many separate hypotheses only in view of a superior hypothesis,” which
precisely is equality. In other words: because equality is M. Proudhon’s
ideal. He imagines that the division of labour, credit, the workshop –
all economic relations – were invented merely for the benefit of
equality, and yet they always ended up by turning against it. Since
history and the fiction of M. Proudhon contradict each other at every
step, the latter concludes that there is a contradiction. If there is a
contradiction, it exists only between his fixed idea and real movement.

Henceforth, the good side of an economic relation is that which affirms
equality; the bad side, that which negates it and affirms inequality.
Every new category is a hypothesis of the social genius to eliminate the
inequality engendered by the preceding hypothesis. In short, equality is
the primordial intention, the mystical tendency, the providential aim
that the social genius has constantly before its eyes as it whirls in
the circle of economic contradictions. Thus, Providence is the
locomotive which makes the whole of M. Proudhon’s economic baggage move
better than his pure and volatized reason. He has devoted to Providence
a whole chapter, which follows the one on taxes.

Providence, providential aim, this is the great word used today to
explain the movement of history. In fact, this word explains nothing. It
is at most a rhetorical form, one of the various ways of paraphrasing
facts.

It is a fact that in Scotland landed property acquired a new value by
the development of English industry. This industry opened up new outlets
for wool. In order to produce wool on a large scale, arable land had to
be transformed into pasturage. To effect this transformation, the
estates had to be concentrated. To concentrate the estates, small
holdings had first to be abolished, thousands of tenants had to be
driven from their native soil and a few shepherds in charge of millions
of sheep to be installed in their place. Thus, by successive
transformations, landed property in Scotland has resulted in the driving
out of men by sheep. Now say that the providential aim of the
institution of landed property in Scotland was to have men driven out by
sheep, and you will have made providential history.

Of course, the tendency towards equality belongs to our century. To say
now that all former centuries, with entirely different needs, means of
production, etc., worked providentially for the realization of equality
is, firstly, to substitute the means and the men of our century for the
men and the means of earlier centuries and to misunderstand the
historical movement by which the successive generations transformed the
results acquired by the generations that preceded them. Economists know
very well that the very thing that was for the one a finished product
was for the other but the raw material for new production.

Suppose, as M. Proudhon does, that social genius produced, or rather
improvised, the feudal lords with the providential aim of transforming
the settlers into responsible and equally-placed workers: and you will
have effected a substitution of aims and of persons worthy of the
Providence that instituted landed property in Scotland, in order to give
itself the malicious pleasure of driving out men by sheep.

But since M. Proudhon takes such a tender interest in Providence, we
refer him to the _Histoire de l’economie politique_ of M. de
Villeneuve-Bargemont, who likewise goes in pursuit of a providential
aim. This aim, however, is not equality, but Catholicism.

Seventh and Last Observation

Economists have a singular method of procedure. There are only two kinds
of institutions for them, artificial and natural. The institutions of
feudalism are artificial institutions, those of the bourgeoisie are
natural institutions. In this, they resemble the theologians, who
likewise establish two kinds of religion. Every religion which is not
theirs is an invention of men, while their own is an emanation from God.
When the economists say that present-day relations – the relations of
bourgeois production – are natural, they imply that these are the
relations in which wealth is created and productive forces developed in
conformity with the laws of nature. These relations therefore are
themselves natural laws independent of the influence of time. They are
eternal laws which must always govern society. Thus, there has been
history, but there is no longer any. There has been history, since there
were the institutions of feudalism, and in these institutions of
feudalism we find quite different relations of production from those of
bourgeois society, which the economists try to pass off as natural and
as such, eternal.

Feudalism also had its proletariat – serfdom, which continued all the
germs of the bourgeoisie. Feudal production also had two antagonistic
elements which are likewise designated by the name of the _good side_
and the _bad side_ of feudalism, irrespective of the fact that it is
always the bad side that in the end triumphs over the good side. It is
the bad side that produces the movement which makes history, by
providing a struggle. If, during the epoch of the domination of
feudalism, the economists, enthusiastic over the knightly virtues, the
beautiful harmony between rights and duties, the patriarchal life of the
towns, the prosperous condition of domestic industry in the countryside,
the development of industry organized into corporations, guilds and
fraternities, in short, everything that constitutes the good side of
feudalism, had set themselves the problem of eliminating everything that
cast a shadow on the picture – serfdom, privileges, anarchy – what would
have happened? All the elements which called forth the struggle would
have been destroyed, and the development of the bourgeoisie nipped in
the bud. One would have set oneself the absurd problem of eliminating
history.

After the triumph of the bourgeoisie, there was no longer any question
of the good or the bad side of feudalism. The bourgeoisie took
possession of the productive forces it had developed under feudalism.
All the old economic forms, the corresponding civil relations, the
political state which was the official expression of the old civil
society, were smashed.

Thus, feudal production, to be judged properly, must be considered as a
mode of production founded on antagonism. It must be shown how wealth
was produced within this antagonism, how the productive forces were
developed at the same time as class antagonisms, how one of the classes,
the bad side, the drawback of society, went on growing until the
material conditions for its emancipation had attained full maturity. Is
not this as good as saying that the mode of production, the relations in
which productive forces are developed, are anything but eternal laws,
but that they correspond to a definite development of men and of their
productive forces, and that a change in men’s productive forces
necessarily brings about a change in their relations of production? As
the main thing is not to be deprived of the fruits of civilization, of
the acquired productive forces, the traditional forms in which they were
produced must be smashed. From this moment, the revolutionary class
becomes conservative.

The bourgeoisie begins with a proletariat which is itself a relic of the
proletariat [In the copy presented by Marx to N. Utina, the words
“working class” are written here. - Ed.] of feudal times. In the course
of its historical development, the bourgeoisie necessarily develops its
antagonistic character, which at first is more or less disguised,
existing only in a latent state. As the bourgeoisie develops, there
develops in its bosom a new proletariat, a modern proletariat; there
develops a struggle between the proletarian class and the bourgeoisie
class, a struggle which, before being felt, perceived, appreciated,
understood, avowed, and proclaimed aloud by both sides, expresses
itself, to start with, merely in partial and momentary conflicts, in
subversive acts. On the other hand, if all the members of the modern
bourgeoisie have the same interests inasmuch as they form a class as
against another class, they have opposite, antagonistic interests
inasmuch as they stand face-to-face with one another. This opposition of
interests results from the economic conditions of their bourgeois life.
From day to day it thus becomes clearer that the production relations in
which the bourgeoisie moves have not a simple, uniform character, but a
dual character; that in the selfsame relations in which wealth is
produced, poverty is also produced; that in the selfsame relations in
which there is a development of the productive forces, there is also a
force producing repression; that these relations produce bourgeois
wealth – i.e., the wealth of the bourgeois class – only by continually
annihilating the wealth of the individual members of this class and by
producing an ever-growing proletariat.

The more the antagonistic character comes to light, the more the
economists, the scientific representatives of bourgeois production, find
themselves in conflict with their own theory; and different schools
arise.

We have the _fatalist_ economists, who in their theory are as
indifferent to what they call the drawbacks of bourgeois production as
the bourgeois themselves are in practice to the sufferings of the
proletarians who help them to acquire wealth. In this fatalist school,
there are Classics and Romantics. The Classics, like Adam Smith and
Ricardo, represent a bourgeoisie which, while still struggling with the
relics of feudal society, works only to purge economic relations of
feudal taints, to increase the productive forces and to give a new
upsurge to industry and commerce. The proletariat that takes part in
this struggle and is absorbed in this feverish labour experiences only
passing, accidental sufferings, and itself regards them as such.
Economists like Adam Smith and Ricardo, who are the historians of this
epoch, have no other mission than that of showing how wealth is acquired
in bourgeois production relations, of formulating these relations into
categories, into laws, and of showing how superior these laws, these
categories, are for the production of wealth to the laws and categories
of feudal society. Poverty is in their eyes merely the pang which
accompanies every childbirth, in nature as in industry.

The Romantics belong to our own age, in which the bourgeoisie is in
direct opposition to the proletariat; in which poverty is engendered in
as great abundance as wealth. The economists now pose as blasé
fatalists, who, from their elevated position, cast a proudly disdainful
glance at the human machines who manufacture wealth. They copy all the
developments given by their predecessors, and the indifference which in
the latter was merely naiveté becomes in them coquetry.

Next comes the _humanitarian_ _school_, which sympathizes with the bad
side of present-day production relations. It seeks, by way of easing its
conscience, to palliate even if slightly the real contrasts; it
sincerely deplores the distress of the proletariat, the unbridled
competition of the bourgeois among themselves; it counsels the workers
to be sober, to work hard and to have few children; it advises the
bourgeois to put a reasoned ardour into production. The whole theory of
this school rests on interminable distinctions between theory and
practice, between principles and results, between ideas and application,
between form and content, between essence and reality, between right and
fact, between the good side and the bad side.

The _philanthropic schoo_l is the humanitarian school carried to
perfection. It denies the necessity of antagonism; it wants to turn all
men into bourgeois; it wants to realize theory in so far as it is
distinguished from practice and contains no antagonism. It goes without
saying that, in theory, it is easy to make an abstraction of the
contradictions that are met with at every moment in actual reality. This
theory would therefore become idealized reality. The philanthropists,
then, want to retain the categories which express bourgeois relations,
without the antagonism which constitutes them and is inseparable from
them. They think they are seriously fighting bourgeois practice, and
they are more bourgeois than the others.

Just as the _economists_ are the scientific representatives of the
bourgeois class, so the _socialists_ and _communists_ are the
theoreticians of the proletarian class. So long as the proletariat is
not yet sufficiently developed to constitute itself as a class, and
consequently so long as the struggle itself of the proletariat with the
bourgeoisie has not yet assumed a political character, and the
productive forces are not yet sufficiently developed in the bosom of the
bourgeoisie itself to enable us to catch a glimpse of the material
conditions necessary for the emancipation of the proletariat and for the
formation of a new society, these theoreticians are merely utopians who,
to meet the wants of the oppressed classes, improvise systems and go in
search of a regenerating science. But in the measure that history moves
forward, and with it the struggle of the proletariat assumes clearer
outlines, they no longer need to seek science in their minds; they have
only to take note of what is happening before their eyes and to become
its mouthpiece. So long as they look for science and merely make
systems, so long as they are at the beginning of the struggle, they see
in poverty nothing but poverty, without seeing in it the revolutionary,
subversive side, which will overthrow the old society. From this moment,
science, which is a product of the historical movement, has associated
itself consciously with it, has ceased to be doctrinaire and has become
revolutionary.

Let us return to M. Proudhon.

Every economic relation has a good and a bad side; it is the one point
on which M. Proudhon does not give himself the lie. He sees the good
side expounded by the economists; the bad side he sees denounced by the
socialists. He borrows from the economists the necessity of eternal
relations; he borrows from the socialists the illusion of seeing in
poverty nothing but poverty. He is in agreement with both in wanting to
fall back upon the authority of science. Science for him reduces itself
to the slender proportions of a scientific formula; he is the man in
search of formulas. Thus it is that M. Proudhon flatters himself on
having given a criticism of both political economy and communism: he is
beneath them both. Beneath the economists, since, as a philosopher who
has at his elbow a magic formula, he thought he could dispense with
going into purely economic details; beneath the socialists, because he
has neither courage enough nor insight enough to rise, be it even
speculatively, above the bourgeois horizon.

He wants to be the synthesis – he is a composite error.

He wants to soar as the man of science above the bourgeois and
proletarians; he is merely the petty bourgeois, continually tossed back
and forth between capital and labour, political economy and communism.

§ 2. DIVISION of Labour and Machinery

The division of labour, according to M. Proudhon, opens the series of
economic evolutions.

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Good side of the division of      | “Considered in its essence, the   |
| labour                            | division of labour is the manner  |
|                                   | in which equality of conditions   |
|                                   | and intelligence is realized.”    |
|                                   | (Tome I, p. 93.)                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                   |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Bad side of the division of       | “The division of labour has       |
| labour                            | become for us an instrument of    |
|                                   | poverty.” (Tome I, p. 94.)        |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | “Labour, by dividing itself       |
|                                   | according to the law which is     |
|                                   | peculiar to it, and which is the  |
|                                   | primary condition of its          |
|                                   | fruitfulness, ends in the         |
|                                   | negation of its aims and destroys |
|                                   | itself.” (Tome I, p. 94.)         |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                   |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Problem to be solved              | To find the “recomposition which  |
|                                   | wipes out the drawbacks of the    |
|                                   | division, while retaining its     |
|                                   | useful effects.”                  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

The division of labour is, according to M. Proudhon, an eternal law, a
simple, abstract category. Therefore the abstraction, the idea, the word
must suffice for him to explain the division of labour at different
historical epochs. Castes, corporations, manufacture, large-scale
industry, must be explained by the single word divide. First study
carefully the meaning of “divide,” and you will have no need to study
the numerous influences which give the division of labour a definitive
character in every epoch.

Certainly, things would be made much too easy if they were reduced to M.
Proudhon’s categories. History does not proceed so categorically. It
took three whole centuries in Germany to establish the first big
division of labour, the separation of the towns from the country. In
proportion, as this one relation of town and country was modified, the
whole of society was modified. To take only this one aspect of the
division of labour, you have the old republics, and you have Christian
feudalism; you have old England with its barons and you have modern
England with its cotton lords. In the 14th and 15th centuries, when
there were as yet no colonies, when America did not yet exist for
Europe, when Asia existed only through the intermediary of
Constantinople, when the Mediterranean was the centre of commercial
activity, the division of labour had a very different form, a very
different aspect from that of the 17th century, when the Spanish, the
Portuguese, the Dutch, the English, and the French had colonies
established in all parts of the world. The extent of the market, its
physiognomy, give to the division of labour at different periods a
physiognomy, a character, which it would be difficult to deduce from the
single word divide, from the idea, from the category.

“All economists since Adam Smith,” says M. Proudhon, “have pointed out
the advantages and drawbacks of the law of division, but insist much
more on the first than on the second, because that was more serviceable
for their optimism, and none of them has ever wondered what could be the
drawbacks to a law.... How does the same principle, pursued vigorously
to its consequences, lead to diametrically opposite results? Not one
economist before or since A. Smith has even perceived that here was a
problem to elucidate. Say goes to the length of recognizing that in the
division of labour the same cause that produces the good engenders the
bad.” (Vol. I, p. 95-96)

Adam Smith goes further than M. Proudhon thinks. He saw clearly that

“the difference of natural talents in different men is, in reality, much
less than we are aware of; and the very different genius which appears
to distinguish men of different professions, when grown up to maturity,
is not so much the cause as the effect of the division of labour.” (Vol.
I, p. 20)

In principle, a porter differs less from a philosopher than a mastiff
from a greyhound. It is the division of labour which has set a gulf
between them. All this does not prevent M. Proudhon from saying
elsewhere that Adam Smith has not the slightest idea of the drawbacks
produced by the division of labour. It is this again that makes him say
that J. B. Say was the first to recognize “that in the division of
labour the same cause that produces the good engenders the bad.” (Vol.
I, p. 96)

But let us listen to Lemontey; _Suum cuique_. [To each his own.]

“M. J. B. Say has done me the honour of adopting in his excellent
treatise on political economy the principle that I brought to light in
this fragment on the moral influence of the division of labour. The
somewhat frivolous title of my book[8] doubtless prevented him from
citing me. It is only to this motive that I can attribute the silence of
a writer too rich in his own stock to disavow so modest a loan.”
(Lemontey, Oeuvres completes, Vol. I, p. 245, Paris, 1840)

Let us do him this justice: Lemontey wittily exposed the unpleasant
consequences of the division of labour as it is constituted today, and
M. Proudhon found nothing to add to it. But now that, through the fault
of M. Proudhon, we have been drawn into this question of priority, let
us say again, in passing, that long before M. Lemontey, and 17 years
before Adam Smith, who was a pupil of A. Ferguson, the last-named gave a
clear exposition of the subject in a chapter which deals specifically
with the division of labour.

“It may even be doubted, whether the measure of national capacity
increases with the advancement of arts. Many mechanical arts... succeed
best under a total suppression of sentiment and reason; and ignorance is
the mother of industry as well as superstition. Reflection and fancy are
subject to err; but a habit of moving the hand, or the foot, is
independent of either. Manufactures, accordingly, prosper most, where
the mind is least consulted, and where the workshop may, without any
great effort of imagination, be considered as an engine, the parts of
which are men.... The general officer may be a great proficient in the
knowledge of war, while the skill of the soldier is confined to a few
motions of the hand and the foot. The former may have gained what the
latter has lost.... And thinking itself, in this age of separations, may
become a peculiar craft.” (A. Ferguson, An Essay on the History of Civil
Society, Edinburgh, 1783 (Vol. II, pp. 108, 109, 110)

To bring this literary survey to a close, we expressly deny that “all
economists have insisted far more on the advantages than on the
drawbacks of the division of labour.” It suffices to mention Sismondi.

Thus, as far as the advantages of the division of labour are concerned,
M. Proudhon had nothing further to do than to paraphrase the general
phrases known to everybody.

Let us now see how he derives from the division of labour, taken as a
general law, as a category, as a thought, the drawbacks which are
attached to it. How is it that this category, this law implies an
unequal distribution of labour to the detriment of M. Proudhon’s
equalitarian system?

“At this solemn hour of the division of labour, the storm winds begin to
blow over humanity. Progress does not take place for all in an equal and
uniform manner.... It begins by taking possession of a small number of
the privileged.... It is this preference for person on the part of
progress that has for so long kept up the belief in the natural and
providential inequality of conditions, has given rise to castes, and
hierarchically constituted all societies.” (Proudhon, Vol. I, p. 94)

The division of labour created castes. Now, castes are the drawbacks of
the division of labour; thus, it is the division of labour that has
engendered the drawbacks. _Quod erat demonstrandum._ [Which was the
thing to be proved.] Will you go further and ask what made the division
of labour create castes, hierarchical constitutions and privileged
persons? M. Proudhon will tell you: Progress. And what made progress?
Limitation. Limitation, for M. Proudhon, is acceptance of persons on the
part of progress.

After philosophy comes history. It is no longer either descriptive
history or dialectical history, it is comparative history. M. Proudhon
establishes a parallel between the present-day printing worker and the
printing worker of the Middle Ages; between the man of letters of today
and the man of letters of the Middle Ages, and he weighs down the
balance on the side of those who belong more or less to the division of
labour as the Middle Ages constituted or transmitted it. He opposes the
division of labour of one historical epoch. Was that what M. Proudhon
had to prove? No. He should have shown us the drawbacks of the division
of labour in general, of the division of labour as a category. Besides,
why stress this part of M. Proudhon’s work, since a little later we
shall see him formally retract all these alleged developments?

“The first effect of fractional labour,” continues M. Proudhon, “after
the depravation of the soul, is the prolongation of the shifts, which
grow in inverse ratio to the sum total of intelligence expended.... But
as the length of the shifts cannot exceed 16 to 18 hours per day, the
moment the compensation cannot be taken out of the time, it will be
taken out of the price, and the wages will diminish.... What is certain,
and the only thing for us to note, is that the universal conscience does
not assess at the same rate the work of a foreman and the labour of a
mechanic’s assistant. It is therefore necessary to reduce the price of
the day’s work; so that the worker, after having been afflicted in his
soul by a degrading function, cannot escape being struck in his body by
the meagreness of his remuneration.” (Vol. I, p. 97-98)

We pass over the logical value of these syllogisms, which Kant would
call paralogisms which lead astray.

This is the substance of it:

The division of labour reduces the worker to a degrading function; to
this degrading function corresponds a depraved soul; to the depravation
of the soul is befitting an ever-increasing wage reduction. And to prove
that this reduction is befitting to a depraved soul, M. Proudhon says,
to relieve his conscience, that the universal conscience wills it thus.
Is M. Proudhon’s soul to be reckoned as a part of the universal
conscience?

_Machinery_ is, for M. Proudhon, “the logical antithesis of the division
of labour,” and with the help of his dialectics, he begins by
transforming machinery into the workshop.

After presupposing the modern workshop, in order to make poverty the
outcome of the division of labour, M. Proudhon presupposes poverty
engendered by the division of labour, in order to come to the workshop
and be able to represent it as the dialectical negation of that poverty.
After striking the worker morally by a degrading function, physically by
the meagreness of the wage; after putting the worker under the
dependence of the foreman, and debasing his work to the labour of a
mechanic’s assistant, he lays the blame again on the workshop and the
machinery for degrading the worker “by giving him a master,” and he
completes his abasement by making him “sink from the rank of artisan to
that of common labourer.” Excellent dialectics! And if he only stopped
there! But no, he has to have a new history of the division of labour,
not any longer to derive the contradictions from it, but to reconstruct
the workshop after his own fashion. To attain this end he finds himself
compelled to forget all he has just said about division.

Labour is organised, is divided differently according to the instruments
it disposes over. The hand-mill presupposes a different division of
labour from the steam-mill. Thus, it is slapping history in the face to
want to begin by the division of labour in general, in order to get
subsequently to a specific instrument of production, machinery.

Machinery is no more an economic category than the bullock that drags
the plough. Machinery is merely a productive force. The modern workshop,
which depends on the application of machinery, is a social production
relation, an economic category.

Let us see now how things happen in M. Proudhon’s brilliant imagination.

“In society, the incessant appearance of machinery is the antithesis,
the inverse formula of the division of labour: it is the protest of the
industrial genius against fractional and homicidal labour. What,
actually, is a machine? A way of uniting different portions of labour
which had been separated by the division of labour. Every machine can be
defined as a summary of several operations.... Thus, through the machine
there will be a restoration of the worker.... Machinery, which in
political economy places itself in contradiction to the division of
labour, represents synthesis, which in the human mind is opposed to
analysis.... Division merely separated the different parts of labour,
letting each one devote himself to the speciality which most suited him;
the workshop groups the workers according to the relation of each part
to the whole.... It introduces the principle of authority in labour....
But this is not all; the machine or the workshop, after degrading the
worker by giving him a master, completes his abasement by making him
sink from the rank of artisan to that of common labourer.... The period
we are going through at the moment, that of machinery, is distinguished
by a special characteristic, the wage worker. The wage worker is
subsequent to the division of labour and to exchange.” (Vol. I, p. 135,
136, 161)

Just a simple remark to M. Proudhon. The separation of the different
parts of labour, leaving to each one the opportunity of devoting himself
to the speciality best suited to him – a separation which M. Proudhon
dates from the beginning of the world – exists only in modern industry
under the rule of competition.

M. Proudhon goes on to give us a most “interesting genealogy,” to show
how the workshop arose from the division of labour and the wage worker
from the workshop.

1) He supposes a man who “noticed that by dividing up production into
its different parts and having each one performed by a separate worker,”
the forces of production would be multiplied.

2) This man, “grasping the thread of this idea, tells himself that, by
forming a permanent group of workers selected for the special purpose he
sets himself, he will obtain a more sustained production, etc.” (Vol. I,
p. 161)

3) This man makes a proposal to other men, to make them grasp his idea
and the thread of his idea.

4) This man, at the beginning of industry, deals on terms of equality
with his companions who later become his workmen.

5) “One realises, in fact, that this original equality had rapidly to
disappear in view of the advantageous position of the master and the
dependence of the wage-earner.” (Vol. I, p.163)

That is another example of M. Proudhon’s historical and descriptive
method.

Let us now examine, from the historical and economic point of view,
whether the workshop of the machine really introduced the _principle of
authority_ in society subsequently to the division of labour; whether it
rehabilitated the worker on the one hand, while submitting him to
authority on the other; whether the machine is the recomposition of
divided labour, the synthesis of labour as opposed to its analysis.

Society as a whole has this in common with the interior of a workshop,
that it too has its division of labour. If one took as a model the
division of labour in a modern workshop, in order to apply it to a whole
society, the society best organized for the production of wealth would
undoubtedly be that which had a single chief employer, distributing
tasks to different members of the community according to a previously
fixed rule. But this is by no means the case. While inside the modern
workshop the division of labour is meticulously regulated by the
authority of the employer, modern society has no other rule, no other
authority for the distribution of labour than free competition.

Under the patriarchal system, under the caste system, under the feudal
and corporative system, there was division of labour in the whole of
society according to fixed rules. Were these rules established by a
legislator? No. Originally born of the conditions of material
production, they were raised to the status of laws only much later. In
this way, these different forms of the division of labour became so many
bases of social organization. As for the division in the workshop, it
was very little developed in all these forms of society.

It can even be laid down as a general rule that the less authority
presides over the division of labour inside society, the more the
division of labour develops inside the workshop, and the more it is
subjected there to the authority of a single person. Thus authority in
the workshop and authority in society, in relation to the division of
labour, are in inverse ratio to each other.

The question now is what kind of workshop it is in which the occupations
are very much separated, where each worker’s task is reduced to a very
simple operation, and where the authority, capital, groups and directs
the work. How was this workshop brought into existence? In order to
answer this question, we shall have to examine how manufacturing
industry, properly so-called, has developed. I am speaking here of that
industry which is not yet industry, with its machinery, but which is
already no longer the industry of the artisans of the Middle Ages, nor
domestic industry. We shall not go into great detail: we shall merely
give a few main points to show that history is not to be made with
formulas.

One of the most indispensable conditions for the formation of
manufacturing industry was the accumulation of capital, facilitated by
the discovery of America and the import of its precious metals.

It is sufficiently proved that the increase in the means of exchange
resulted in the depreciation of wages and land rents, on the one hand,
and the growth of industrial profits on the other. In other words: to
the extent that the propertied class and the working class, the feudal
lords and the people, sank, to that extent the capitalist class, the
bourgeoisie, rose.

There were yet other circumstances which contributed simultaneously to
the development of manufacturing industry: the increase of commodities
put into circulation from the moment that trade had penetrated to the
East Indies by way of the Cape of Good Hope; the colonial system; the
development of maritime trade.

Another point which has not yet been sufficiently appreciated in the
history of manufacturing industry is the disbanding of the numerous
retinues of feudal lords, whose subordinate ranks became vagrants before
entering the workshop. The creation of the workshop was preceded by an
almost universal vagrancy in the 15th and 16th centuries. The workshop
found, besides, a powerful support in the many peasants who, continually
driven from the country owing to the transformation of the fields into
pastures and to the progress in agriculture which necessitated fewer
hands for the tillage of the soil, went on congregating in the towns
during whole centuries.

The growth of the market, the accumulation of capital, the modification
in the social position of the classes, a large number of persons being
deprived of their sources of income, all these are historical
preconditions for the formation of manufacture. It was not, as M.
Proudhon says, friendly agreements between equals that brought men into
the workshop. It was not even in the bosom of the old guilds that
manufacture was born. It was the merchant that became head of the modern
workshop, and not the old guildmaster. Almost everywhere there was a
desperate struggle between manufacture and crafts.

The accumulation and concentration of instruments and workers preceded
the development of the division of labour inside the workshop.
Manufacture consisted much more in the bringing together of many workers
and many crafts in one place, in one room under the command of one
capital, than in the analysis of labour and the adaptation of a special
worker to a very simple task.

The utility of a workshop consisted much less in the division of labour
as such than in the circumstances that work was done on a much larger
scale, that many unnecessary expenses were saved, etc. At the end of the
16th and at the beginning of the 17th century, Dutch manufacture
scarcely knew any division of labour.

The development of the division of labour supposes the assemblage of
workers in a workshop. There is not one single example, whether in the
16th or in the 17th century, of the different branches of one and the
same craft being exploited separately to such an extent that it would
have sufficed to assemble them all in one place so as to obtain a
complete, ready-made workshop. But once the men and the instruments had
been brought together, the division of labour, such as it had existed in
the form of the guilds, was reproduced, necessarily reflected inside the
workshop.

For M. Proudhon, who sees things upside down, if he sees them at all,
the division of labour, in Adam Smith’s sense, precedes the workshop,
which is a condition of its existence.

Machinery, properly so-called, dates from the end of the 18th century.
Nothing is more absurd than to see in machinery the antithesis of the
division of labour, the synthesis restoring unity to divided labour.

The machine is a unification of the instruments of labour, and by no
means a combination of different operations for the worker himself.

“When, by the division of labour, each particular operation has been
simplified to the use of a single instrument, the linking up of all
these instruments, set in motion by a single engine, constitutes – a
machine.” (Babbage, Traité sur l’économie des machines [et des
manufactures], p. 230, Paris, 1833)

Simple tools; accumulation tools; composite tools; setting in motion of
a composite tool by a single hand engine, by man; setting in motion of
these instruments by natural forces, machines; system of machines having
one motor; system of machines having one automatic motor – this is the
progress of machinery.

The concentration of the instruments of production and the division of
labour are as inseparable one from the other as are, in the political
sphere, the concentration of public authority and the division of
private interests. England, with the concentration of the land, this
instrument of agricultural labour, has at the same time division of
agricultural labour and the application of machinery to the exploitation
of the soil. France, which has the division of the instruments, the
small holdings system, has, in general, neither division of agricultural
labour nor application of machinery to the soil.

For M. Proudhon the concentration of the instruments of labour is the
negation of the division of labour. In reality, we find again the
reverse. As the concentration of instruments develops, the division
develops also, and vice versa. This is why every big mechanical
invention is followed by a greater division of labour, and each increase
in the division of labour gives rise in turn to new mechanical
inventions.

We need not recall the fact that the great progress of the division of
labour began in England after the invention of machinery. Thus, the
weavers and spinners were for the most part peasants like those one
still meets in backward countries. The invention of machinery brought
about the separation of manufacturing industry from agricultural
industry. The weaver and the spinner, united but lately in a single
family, were separated by the machine. Thanks to the machine, the
spinner can live in England while the weaver resides in the East Indies.
Before the invention of machinery, the industry of a country was carried
on chiefly with raw materials that were the products of its own soil; in
England – wool, in Germany – flax, in France – silks and flax, in the
East Indies and the Levant – cottons, etc. Thanks to the application of
machinery and of steam, the division of labour was about to assume such
dimensions that large-scale industry, detached from the national soil,
depends entirely on the world market, on international exchange, on an
international division of labour. In short – the machine has so great an
influence on the division of labour, that when, in the manufacture of
some object, a means has been found to produce parts of it mechanically,
the manufacture splits up immediately into two works independent of each
other.

Need we speak of the philanthropic and providential aim that M. Proudhon
discovers in the invention and first application of machinery?

When in England the market had become so far developed that manual
labour was no longer adequate, the need for machinery was felt. Then
came the idea of the application of mechanical science, already quite
developed in the 18th century.

The automatic workshop opened its career with acts which were anything
but philanthropic. Children were kept at work at the whip’s end; they
were made an object of traffic and contracts were undertaken with the
orphanages. All the laws on the apprenticeship of workers were repealed,
because, to use M. Proudhon’s phraseology, there was no further need for
synthetic workers. Finally, from 1825 onwards, almost all the new
inventions were the result of collisions between the worker and the
employer who sought at all costs to depreciate the worker’s specialised
ability. After each new strike of any importance, there appeared a new
machine. So little indeed did the worker see in the application of
machinery a sort of rehabilitation, restoration – as M. Proudhon would
say – that in the 18th century he stood out for a very long time against
the incipient domination of the automaton.

“Wyatt,” says Doctor Ure, “invented the series of fluted rollers... (the
spinning fingers usually ascribed to Awkright).... The main difficulty
did not, to my apprehension, lie so much in the invention of a proper
self-acting mechanism... as in training human beings to renounce their
desultory habits of work, and to identify themselves with the unvarying
regularity of the complex automaton. But to devise and administer a
successful code of factory discipline, suited to the necessities of
factory diligence, was the Herculean enterprise, the noble achievement
of Awkright.” (Vol. I, pp. 21-22, 23)

In short, by the introduction of machinery, the division of labour
inside society has grown up, the task of the worker inside the workshop
has been simplified, capital has been concentrated, human beings have
been further dismembered.

When M. Proudhon wants to be an economist, and to abandon for a moment
the “evolution of ideas in serial relation in the understanding,” then
he goes and draws erudition from Adam Smith, from a time when the
automatic workshop was only just coming into existence. Indeed, what a
difference between the division of labour as it existed in Adam Smith’s
day and as we see it in the automatic workshop! In order to make this
properly understood, we need only quote a few passages from Dr. Ure’s
The Philosophy of Manufactures.

“When Adam Smith wrote his immortal elements of economics, automatic
machinery being hardly known, he was properly led to regard the division
of labour as the grand principle of manufacturing improvement; and he
showed, in the example of pin-making, how each handicraftsman, being
thereby enabled to perfect himself by practice in one point, became a
quicker and cheaper workman. In each branch of manufacture he saw that
some parts were, on that principle, of easy execution, like the cutting
of pin wires into uniform lengths, and some were comparatively
difficult, like the formation and fixation of their heads; and therefore
he concluded that to each a workman of appropriate value and cost was
naturally assigned. This appropriation forms the very essence of the
division of labour....

“But what was in Dr. Smith’s time a topic of useful illustration, cannot
now be used without risk of misleading the public mind as to the right
principle of manufacturing industry. In fact, the division, or rather
adaptation of labour to the different talents of men, is little thought
of in factory employment. On the contrary, wherever a process requires a
peculiar dexterity and steadiness of hand, it is withdrawn as soon as
possible from the cunning workman, who is prone to irregularities of
many kinds, and it is placed in charge of a peculiar mechanism, so
self-regulating, that a child may superintend it.

“The principle of the factory system then is, to substitute mechanical
science for hand skill, and the partition of a process into its
essential constituents, for the division or gradation of labour among
artisans. On the handicraft plan, labour more or less skilled, was
usually the most expensive element of production... but on the automatic
plan, skilled labour gets progressively superseded, and will,
eventually, be replaced by mere overlookers of machines.

“By the infirmity of human nature it happens, that the more skilful the
workman, the more self-willed and intractable he is apt to become, and,
of course, the less fit a component of a mechanical system, in which, by
occasional irregularities, he may do great damage to the whole. The
grand object therefore of the modern manufacturer is, through the union
of capital and science, to reduce the task of his workpeople to the
exercise of vigilance and dexterity – faculties, when concentrated to
one process, speedily brought to perfection in the young.

“On the gradation system, a man must serve an apprenticeship of many
years before his hand and eye become skilled enough for certain
mechanical feats; but on the system of decomposing a process into its
constituents, and embodying each part in an automatic machine, a person
of common care and capacity may be entrusted with any of the said
elementary parts after a short probation, and may be transferred from
one to another, on any emergency, at the discretion of the master. Such
translations are utterly at variance with the old practice of the
division of labour, which fixed one man to shaping the head of a pin,
and another to sharpening its point, with the most irksome and
spirit-wasting uniformity, for a whole life.... But on the equalisation
plan of self-acting machines, the operative needs to call his faculties
only into agreeable exercise.... As his business consists in ending the
work of a well-regulated mechanism, he can learn it in a short period;
and when he transfers his services, from one machine to another, he
varies his task, and enlarges his views, by thinking on those general
combinations which result from his and his companions’ labours. Thus,
that cramping of the faculties, that narrowing of the mind, that
stunting of the frame, which were ascribed, and not unjustly, by moral
writers, to the division of labour, cannot, in common circumstances,
occur under the equable distribution of industry.... It is, in fact, the
constant aim and tendency of every improvement in machinery to supersede
human labour altogether, or to diminish its cost, by substituting the
industry of women and children for that of men; or that of ordinary
labourers for trained artisans.... This tendency to employ merely
children with watchful eyes and nimble fingers, instead of journeymen of
long experience, shows how the scholastic dogma of the division of
labour into degrees of skill has been exploded by our enlightened
manufacturers.” (Andre Ure, Philosophie des manufactures ou Economie
industrielle, Vol. I, Chap. 1, pp. 34-35)

What characterises the division of labour inside modern society is that
it engenders specialised functions, specialists, and with them
craft-idiocy.

“We are struck with admiration,” says Lemontey, “when we see among the
Ancients the same person distinguishing himself to a high degree as
philosopher, poet, orator, historian, priest, administrator, general of
an army. Our souls are appalled at the sight of so vast a domain. Each
one of us plants his hedge and shuts himself up in his enclosure. I do
not know whether by this parcellation the field is enlarged, but I do
know that man is belittled.” (Lemontey, op. cit., p. 213)

What characterises the division of labour in the automatic workshop is
that labour has there completely lost its specialised character. But the
moment every special development stops, the need for universality, the
tendency towards an integral development of the individual begins to be
felt. The automatic workshop wipes out specialists and craft-idiocy.

M. Proudhon, not having understood even this one revolutionary side of
the automatic workshop, takes a step backward and proposes to the worker
that he make not only the 12th part of a pin, but successively all 12
parts of it. The worker would thus arrive at the knowledge and the
consciousness of the pin. This is M. Proudhon’s synthetic labour. Nobody
will contest that to make a movement forward and another movement
backward is to make a synthetic movement.

To sum up, M. Proudhon has not gone further than the petty-bourgeois
ideal. And to realise this ideal, he can think of nothing better than to
take us back to the journeyman or, at most, to the master craftsman of
the Middle Ages. It is enough, he says somewhere in his book, to have
created a masterpiece once in one’s life, to have felt oneself just once
to be a man. Is not this, in form as in content, the masterpiece
demanded by the trade guild of the Middle Ages?

§ 3. Competition and Monopoly

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Good side of competition          | “Competition is as essential to   |
|                                   | labour as division.... It is      |
|                                   | necessary ... for the advent of   |
|                                   | equality.” (Vol. I. pp. 186, 188) |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                   |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Bad side of competition           | “The principle is the negation of |
|                                   | itself. Its most certain result   |
|                                   | is to ruin those whom it drags in |
|                                   | its train.” (Vol. I, p. 185)      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                   |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| General reflection                | “The drawbacks which follow in    |
|                                   | its wake, just as the good it     |
|                                   | provides... both flow logically   |
|                                   | from the principle.” Vol. I, pp.  |
|                                   | 185-86)                           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
|                                   |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Problem to be solved              | “To seek the principle of         |
|                                   | accommodation, which must be      |
|                                   | derived from a law superior to    |
|                                   | liberty itself.” (Vol. I, p. 185) |
|                                   |                                   |
|                                   | “There can, therefore, be no      |
|                                   | question here of destroying       |
|                                   | competition, a thing as           |
|                                   | impossible to destroy as liberty; |
|                                   | we have only to find its          |
|                                   | equilibrium, I would be ready to  |
|                                   | say its police.” (Vol. I, p. 223) |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

M. Proudhon begins by defending the eternal necessity of competition
against those who wish to replace it by emulation.[9]

There is no “purposeless emulation,” and as “the object of every passion
is necessarily analogous to the passion itself – a woman for the lover,
power for the ambitious, gold for the miser, a garland for the poet –
the object of industrial emulation is necessarily profit. Emulation is
nothing but competition itself.” (Vol. I, p. 187)

Competition is emulation with a view to profit. Is industrial emulation
necessarily emulation with a view to profit, that is, competition?? M.
Proudhon proves it by affirming it. We have seen that, for him, to
affirm is to prove, just as to suppose is to deny.

If the immediate object of the lover is the woman, the immediate object
of industrial emulation is the product and not the profit.

Competition is not industrial emulation, it is commercial emulation. In
our time industrial emulation exists only in view of commerce. There are
even phases in the economic life of modern nations when everybody is
seized with a sort of craze for making profit without producing. This
speculation craze, which recurs periodically, lays bare the true
character of competition, which seeks to escape the need for industrial
emulation.

If you had told an artisan of the 14th century that the privileges and
the whole feudal organization of industry were going to be abrogated in
favour of industrial emulation, called competition, he would have
replied that the privileges of the various corporations, guilds and
fraternities were organized competition. M. Proudhon does not impose
upon this when he affirms that “emulation is nothing but competition
itself.”

“Decree that from the first of January 1847, labour and wages shall be
guaranteed to everybody: immediately an immense relaxation will succeed
the high tension of industry.” (Vol. I. p. 189)

Instead of a supposition, an affirmation and a negation, we have now a
decree that M. Proudhon issues purposely to prove the necessity of
competition, its eternity as a category, etc.

If we imagine that decrees are all that is needed to get away from
competition, we shall never get away from it. And if we go so far as to
propose to abolish competition while retaining wages, we shall be
proposing nonsense by royal decree. But nations do not proceed by royal
decree. Before framing such ordinances, they must at least have changed
from top to bottom the conditions of their industrial and political
existence, and consequently their whole manner of being.

M. Proudhon will reply, with his imperturbable assurance, that it is the
hypothesis of “a transformation of our nature without historical
antecedents,” and that he would be right in “excluding is from the
discussion,” we know not in virtue of which ordinance.

M. Proudhon does not know that all history is nothing but a continuous
transformation of human nature.

“Let us stick to the facts. The French Revolution was made for
industrial liberty as much as for political liberty; and although
France, in 1789, had not perceived – let us say it openly – all the
consequences of the principle whose realisation it demanded, it was
mistaken neither in its wishes nor in its expectations. Whoever attempts
to deny this loses, in my view, the right to criticism. I will never
dispute with an adversary who puts as principle the spontaneous error of
25 million men....

“Why then, if competition had not been a principle of social economy, a
decree of fate, a necessity of the human soul, why, instead of
abolishing corporations, guilds and brotherhoods, did nobody think
rather of repairing the whole?” (Vol. I. p. 191, 192)

So, since the French of the 18th century abolished corporations, guilds,
and fraternities instead of modifying them, the French of the 19th
century must modify competition instead of abolishing it. Since
competition was established in France in the 18th century as a result of
historical needs, this competition must not be destroyed in the 19th
century because of other historical needs. M. Proudhon, not
understanding that the establishment of competition was bound up with
the actual development of the men of the 18th century, makes of
competition a necessity of the human soul, _in partibus infidelium_
[literally, territory of the infidels; here, meaning, beyond the realm
of reality.] What would he have made of the great Colbert for the 17th
century?

After the revolution comes the present state of affairs. M. Proudhon
equally draws facts from it to show the eternity of competition, by
proving that all industries in which this category is not yet
sufficiently developed, as in agriculture, are in a state of inferiority
and decrepitude.

To say that there are industries which have not yet reached the stage of
competition, that others again are below the level of bourgeois
production, is drivel which gives not the slightest proof of the
eternity of competition.

All M. Proudhon’s logic amounts to is this: competition is a social
relation in which we are now developing our productive forces. To this
truth, he gives no logical development, but only forms, often very well
developed, when he says that competition is industrial emulation, the
present-day mode of freedom, responsibility in labour, constitution of
value, a condition for the advent of equality, a principle of social
economy, a decree of fate, a necessity of the human soul, an inspiration
of eternal justice, liberty in division, division in liberty, an
economic category.

“_Competition and association_ support each other. Far from excluding
each other they are not even divergent. Whoever says competition already
supposes a common aim. Competition is therefore not egoism, and the most
deplorable error committed by socialism is to have regarded it as the
overthrow of society.” (Vol. I, p. 223)

Whoever says competition says common aim, and that proves, on the one
hand, that competition is association; on the other, that competition is
not egoism. And whoever says egoism, does he not say common aim? Every
egoism operates in society and by the fact of society. Hence it
presupposes society, that is to say, common aims, common needs, common
means of production, etc., etc. Is it, then, by mere chance that the
competition and association which the socialists talk about are not even
divergent?

Socialists know well enough that present-day society is founded on
competition. How could they accuse competition of overthrowing
present-day society which they want to overthrow themselves? And how
could they accuse competition of overthrowing the society to come, in
which they see, on the contrary, the overthrow of competition?

M. Proudhon says, later on, that competition is the opposite of
monopoly, and consequently cannot be the opposite of association.

Feudalism was, from its origins, opposed to patriarchal monarchy; it was
thus not opposed to competition, which was not yet in existence. Does it
follow that competition is not opposed to feudalism?

In actual fact, _society, association_ are denominations which can be
given to every society, to feudal society as well as to bourgeois
society which is association founded on competition. How then can there
be socialists, who, by the single word _association_, think they can
refute competition? And how can M. Proudhon himself wish to defend
competition against socialism by describing competition by the single
word _association_?

All we have just said makes up the beautiful side of competition as M.
Proudhon sees it. Now let us pass on to the ugly side, that is the
negative side, of competition, its drawbacks, its destructive,
subversive elements, its injurious qualities.

There is something dismal about the picture M. Proudhon draws of it.

Competition engenders misery, it foments civil war, it “changes natural
zones,” mixes up nationalities, causes trouble in families, corrupts the
public conscience, “subverts the notion of equity, of justice,” of
morality, and what is worse, it destroys free, honest trade, and does
not even give in exchange synthetic value, fixed, honest price. It
disillusions everyone, even economists. It pushes things so far as to
destroy its very self.

After all the ill M. Proudhon says of it, can there be for the relations
of bourgeois society, for its principles and its illusions, a more
disintegrating, more destructive element than competition?

It must be carefully noted that competition always becomes the more
destructive for bourgeois relations in proportion as it urges on a
feverish creation of new productive forces, that is, of the material
conditions of a new society. In this respect at least, the bad side of
competition would have its good points.

“Competition as an economic position or phase, considered in its origin,
is the necessary result... of the theory of the reduction of general
expenses.” (Vol. I, p. 235)

For M. Proudhon, the circulation of the blood must be a consequence of
Harvey’s theory.

“_Monopoly_ is the inevitable end of competition, which engenders it by
a continual negation of itself. This generation of monopoly is in itself
a justification of it.... Monopoly is the natural opposite of
competition... but as soon as competition is necessary, it implies the
idea of monopoly, since monopoly is, as it were, the seat of each
competing individuality.” (Vol. I, pp. 236, 237)

We rejoice with M. Proudhon that he can for once at least properly apply
his formula to thesis and antithesis. Everyone knows that modern
monopoly is engendered by competition itself.

As for the content, M. Proudhon clings to poetic images. Competition
made “of every subdivision of labour a sort of sovereignty in which each
individual stood with his power and his independence.” Monopoly is “the
seat of every competing individuality.” The sovereignty is worth at
least as much as the seat.

M. Proudhon talks of nothing but modern monopoly engendered by
competition. But we all know that competition was engendered by feudal
monopoly. Thus competition was originally the opposite of monopoly and
not monopoly the opposite of competition. So that modern monopoly is not
a simple antithesis, it is on the contrary the true synthesis.

_Thesis_: Feudal monopoly, before competition.

_Antithesis_: Competition.

_Synthesis_: Modern monopoly, which is the negation of feudal monopoly,
in so far as it implies the system of competition, and the negation of
competition in so far as it is monopoly.

Thus modern monopoly, bourgeois monopoly, is synthetic monopoly, the
negation of the negation, the unity of opposites. It is monopoly in the
pure, normal, rational state.

M. Proudhon is in contradiction with his own philosophy when he turns
bourgeois monopoly into monopoly in the crude, primitive, contradictory,
spasmodic state. M. Rossi, whom M. Proudhon quotes several times on the
subject of monopoly, seems to have a better grasp of the synthetic
character of bourgeois monopoly. In his Cours d’économie politique, he
distinguishes between artificial monopolies and natural monopolies.
Feudal monopolies, he says, are artificial, that is, arbitrary;
bourgeois monopolies are natural, that is, rational.

Monopoly is a good thing, reasons M. Proudhon, since it is an economic
category, an emanation “from the impersonal reason of humanity.”
Competition, again, is a good thing since it also is an economic
category. But what is not good is the reality of monopoly and the
reality of competition. What is still worse is that competition and
monopoly devour each other. What is to be done? Look for the synthesis
of these two eternal thoughts, wrest it from the bosom of God, where is
has been deposited from time immemorial.

In practical life we find not only competition, monopoly and the
antagonism between them, but also the synthesis of the two, which is not
a formula, but a movement. Monopoly produces competition, competition
produces monopoly. Monopolists are made from competition; competitors
become monopolists. If the monopolists restrict their mutual competition
by means of partial associations, competition increases among the
workers; and the more the mass of the proletarians grows as against the
monopolists of one nation, the more desperate competition becomes
between the monopolists of different nations. The synthesis is of such a
character that monopoly can only maintain itself by continually entering
into the struggle of competition.

To make the dialectical transition to the taxes which come after
monopoly, M. Proudhon talks to us about the social genius which, after
zigzagging intrepidly onward,

“after striding with a jaunty step, without repenting and without
halting, reaches the corner of monopoly, casts backward a melancholy
glance, and, after profound reflection, assails all the objects of
production with taxes, and creates a whole administrative organisation,
in order that all employments be given to the proletariat and paid by
the men of monopoly.” (Vol. I, pp. 284, 285)

What can we say of this genius, which, while fasting, walks about in a
zigzag? And what can we say of this walking which has no other object in
view than that of destroying the bourgeois by taxes, whereas taxes are
the very means of giving the bourgeois the wherewithal to preserve
themselves as the ruling class?

Merely to give a glimpse of the manner in which M. Proudhon treats
economic details, it suffices to say that, according to him, the _tax on
consumption_ was established with a view to equality, and to relieve the
proletariat.

The tax on consumption has assumed its true development only since the
rise of the bourgeoisie. In the hands of industrial capital, that is, of
sober and economical wealth, which maintains, reproduces, and increases
itself by the direct exploitation of labour, the tax on consumption was
a means of exploiting the frivolous, gay, prodigal wealth of the fine
lords who did nothing but consume. James Steuart clearly developed this
original purpose of the tax on consumption in his Recherches des
principes de l’economie politique, which he published 10 years before
Adam Smith.

“Under the pure monarchy, the prince seems jealous, as it were, of
growing wealth, and therefore imposes taxes upon people who are growing
richer. Under the limited government they are calculated chiefly to
affect those who from rich are growing poorer. Thus the monarch imposes
a tax upon industry, where everyone is rated in proportion to the gain
he is supposed to make by his profession. The poll-tax and taille are
likewise proportioned to the supposed opulence of everyone libel to
them.... In limited governments, impositions are more generally laid
upon consumption.” (Vol. II, pp. 190-91)

As for the logical sequence of taxes, of the balance of trade, of credit
– in the understanding of M. Proudhon – we could only remark that the
English bourgeoisie, on attaining its political constitution under
William of Orange, created all at once a new system of taxes, public
credit, and the system of protective duties, as soon as it was in a
position freely to develop its conditions of existence.

This brief summary will suffice to give the reader a true idea of M.
Proudhon’s lucubrations on the police or on taxes, the balance of trade,
credit, communism, and population. We defy the most indulgent criticism
to treat these chapters seriously.

§ 4. Property or Ground Rent

 In each historical epoch, property has developed differently and under
a set of entirely different social relations. Thus to define bourgeois
property is nothing else than to give an exposition of all the social
relations of bourgeois production.

To try to give a definition of property as of an independent relation, a
category apart, an abstract and eternal idea, can be nothing but an
illusion of metaphysics or jurisprudence.

M. Proudhon, while seeming to speak of property in general, deals only
with landed property, with ground rent.

“The origin of rent, as property, is, so to speak, extra-economic: it
rests in psychological and moral considerations which are only very
distantly connected with the production of wealth.” (Vol. II, p. 265)

So M. Proudhon declares himself incapable of understanding the economic
origin of rent and of property. He admits that this incapacity obliges
him to resort to psychological and moral considerations, which, indeed,
while only distantly connected with the production of wealth, have yet a
very close connection with the narrowness of his historical views. M.
Proudhon affirms that there is something mystical and mysterious about
the origin of property. Now, to see mystery in the origin of property –
that is, to make a mystery of the relation between production itself and
the distribution of the instruments of production – is not this, to use
M. Proudhon’s language, a renunciation of all claims to economic
science?

M. Proudhon

“confines himself to recalling that at the seventh epoch of economic
evolution – credit – when fiction had caused reality to vanish, and
human activity threatened to lose itself in empty space, it had become
necessary to bind man more closely to nature. Now, rent was the price of
this new contract.” (Vol. II, p. 269)

_L’homme aux quarante écus_[10] foresaw a M. Proudhon of the future:

“Mr. Creator, by your leave: everyone is master in his own world: but
you will never make me believe that the one we live in is made of
glass.”

In your world, where credit was a means of _losing oneself in empty
space_, it is very possible that property became necessary in order to
_bind man to nature_. In the world of real production, where landed
property always precedes credit, M. Proudhon’s _horror vacui_ [horror of
a vacuum] could not exist.

The existence of rent once admitted, whatever its origin, it becomes a
subject of mutually antagonistic negotiations between the farmer and the
landed proprietor. What is the ultimate result of these negotiations, in
other words, what is the average amount of rent? This is what M.
Proudhon says:

“Ricardo’s theory answers this question. In the beginning of society,
when man, new to earth, had before him nothing but huge forests, when
the earth was vast and when industry was beginning to come to life, rent
must have been nil. Land, as yet unformed by labour, was an object of
utility; it was not an exchange value, it was common, not social. Little
by little, the multiplication of families and the progress of
agriculture caused the price of land to make itself felt. Labour came to
give the soil its worth; from this, rent came into being. The more fruit
a field yielded with the same amount of labour, the higher it was
valued; hence the tendency of proprietors was always to arrogate to
themselves the whole amount of the fruits of the soil, less the wages of
the farm – that is, less the costs of production. Thus property followed
on the heels of labour to take from it all the product that exceeded the
actual expenses. As the proprietor fulfils a mystic duty and represents
the community as against the colonus, that farmer is, by the
dispensation of Providence, no more than a responsible labourer, who
must account to society for all he reaps above his legitimate wage....
In essence and by destination, then, rent is an instrument of
distributive justice, one of the thousand means that the genius of
economy employs to attain to equality. It is an immediate land valuation
which is carried out contradictorily by landowners and farmers, without
any possible collusion, in a higher interest, and whose ultimate result
must be to equalise the possession of the land between the exploiters of
the soil and the industrialists.... It needed no less than this magic of
property to snatch from the colonus the surplus of his product which he
cannot help regarding as his own and of which he considers himself to be
exclusively the author. Rent, or rather property, has broken down
agricultural egoism and created a solidarity that no power, no partition
of the land could have brought into being.... The moral effect of
property having been secured, at present what remains to be done is to
distribute the rent.” (Vol. II, pp. 270-72)

All this tumult of words may be reduced firstly to this: Ricardo says
that the excess of the price of agricultural products over their cost of
production, including the ordinary profit and interest on the capital,
gives the measure of the rent. M. Proudhon does better. He makes the
landowner intervene, like a Deus ex machina,[11] and snatch from the
colonus all the surplus of his production over the cost of production.
He makes use of the intervention of the landowner to explain property,
of the intervention of the rent-receiver to explain rent. He answers the
problem by formulating the same problem and adding an extra
syllable.[12]

Let us note also that in determining rent by the difference in fertility
of the soil, M. Proudhon assigns a new origin to it, since land, before
being assessed according to different degrees of fertility, “was not,”
in his view, “an exchange value, but was common.” What, then, has
happened to the fiction about rent having come into being _through the
necessity_ of bringing back _to the land_ man who _was about to lose
himself in the infinity of empty space_?

Now let us free Ricardo’s doctrine from the providential, allegorical,
and mystical phrases in which M. Proudhon has been careful to wrap it.

Rent, in the Ricardian sense, is property in land in its bourgeois
state; that is, feudal property which has become subject to the
conditions of bourgeois production.

We have seen that, according to the Ricardian doctrine, the price of all
objects is determined ultimately by the cost of production, including
the industrial profit; in other words, by the labour time employed. In
manufacturing industry, the price of the product obtained by the minimum
of labour regulates the price of all other commodities of the same kind,
seeing that the cheapest and most productive instruments of production
can be multiplied to infinity and that competition necessarily gives
rise to a market price – that is, a common price for all products of the
same kind.

In agricultural industry, on the contrary, it is the price of the
product obtained by the greatest amount of labour which regulates the
price of all products of the same kind. In the first place, one cannot,
as in manufacturing industry, multiply at will the instruments of
production possessing the same degree of productivity, that is, plots of
land with the same degree of fertility. Then, as population increases,
land of an inferior quality begins to be exploited, or new outlays of
capital, proportionately less productive than before, are made upon the
same plot of land. In both cases a greater amount of labour is expended
to obtain a proportionately smaller product. The needs of the population
having rendered necessary this increase of labour, the product of the
land whose exploitation is the more costly has as certain a sale as that
of a piece of land whose exploitation is cheaper. As competition levels
the market price, the product of the better soil will be paid for as
dearly as that of the inferior. It is the excess of the price of the
products of the better soil over the cost of their production that
constitutes rent. If one could always have at one’s disposal plots of
land of the same degree of fertility; if one could, as in manufacturing
industry, have recourse continually to cheaper and more productive
machines, or if the subsequent outlays of capital produced as much as
the first, then the price of agricultural products would be determined
by the price of commodities produced by the best instruments of
production, as we have seen with the price of manufactured products.
But, from this moment rent would have disappeared also.

For the Ricardian doctrine[13] to be generally true, it is moreover
essential that capital should be freely applicable to different branches
of industry; that a strongly developed competition among the capitalists
should have brought profits to an equal level; that the farmer should be
no more than an industrial capitalist claiming for the use of his
capital on the land,[14] a profit equal to that which he would draw from
his capital if it were applied in any kind of manufacture; that
agricultural exploitation should be subjected to the regime of
large-scale industry; and finally, that the landowner himself should aim
at nothing beyond the money return.

It may happen, as in Ireland, that rent does not yet exist, although the
letting of land has reached an extreme development there. Rent being the
excess not only over wages, but also over industrial profit, it cannot
exist where the landowner’s revenue is nothing but a mere levy on wages.

Thus, far from converting the exploiter of the land, the farmer, into a
_simple labourer_, and “snatching from the cultivator the surplus of his
product, which he cannot help regarding as his own,” rent confronts the
landowner, not with the slave, the serf, the payer of tribute, the wage
labourer, but with the industrial capitalist.

Once constituted as ground rent, ground property has in its possession
only the surplus over production costs, which are determined not only by
wages but also by industrial profit. It is therefore from the landowner
that ground rent snatched a part of his income. Thus, there was a big
lapse of time before the feudal farmer was replaced by the industrial
capitalist. In Germany, for example, this transformation began only in
the last third of the 18th century. It is in England alone that this
relation between the industrial capitalist and the landed proprietor has
been fully developed.

So long as there was only M. Proudhon’s _colonus_, there was no rent.
The moment rent exists, the _colonus_ is no longer the farmer, but the
worker, the farmer’s _colonus_. The abasement of the labourer, reduced
to the role of a simple worker, day labourer, wage-earner, working for
the industrial capitalist; the invention of the industrial capitalist,
exploiting the land like any other factory; the transformation of the
landed proprietor from a petty sovereign into a vulgar usurer; these are
the different relations expressed by rent.

Rent, in the Ricardian sense, is patriarchal agriculture transformed
into commercial industry, industrial capital applied to land, the town
bourgeoisie transplanted into the country. Rent, _instead of binding man
to nature_, has merely bound the exploitation of the land to
competition. Once established as rent, landed property itself is the
result of competition, since from that time onwards it depends on the
market value of agricultural produce. As rent, landed property is
mobilised and becomes an article of commerce. Rent is possible only from
the moment when the development of urban industry, and the social
organisation resulting therefrom, force the landowner to aim solely at
cash profits, at the monetary relation of his agricultural products – in
fact to look upon his landed property only as a machine for coining
money. Rent has so completely divorced the landed proprietor from the
soil, from nature, that he has no need even to know his estates, as is
to be seen in England. As for the farmer, the industrial capitalist and
the agricultural worker, they are no more bound to the land they exploit
than are the employer and the worker in the factories to the cotton and
wool they manufacture; they feel an attachment only for the price of
their production, the monetary product. Hence the jeremiads of the
reactionary parties, who offer up all their prayers for the return of
feudalism, of the good old patriarchal life, of the simple manners and
the fine virtues of our forefathers. The subjection of the soil to the
laws which dominate all other industries is and always will be the
subject of interested condolences. Thus it may be said that rent has
become the motive power which has introduced idyll into the movement of
history.

Ricardo, after postulating bourgeois production as necessary for
determining rent, applies the conception of rent, nevertheless, to the
landed property of all ages and all countries. This is an error common
to all the economists, who represent the bourgeois relations of
production as eternal categories.

From the providential aim of rent – which is, for M. Proudhon, the
transformation of the colonus into a responsible worker, he passes to
the equalised reward of rent.

Rent, as we have just seen, is constituted by the equal price of the
products of lands of unequal fertility, so that a hectolitre of corn
which has cost 10 francs is sold for 20 francs if the cost of production
rises to 20 francs upon soil of inferior quality.

So long as necessity forces the purchase of all the agricultural
products brought into the market, the market price is determined by the
cost of the most expensive product. Thus it is this equalisation of
price, resulting from competition and not from the different fertilities
of the lands, that secures to the owner of the better soil a rent of 10
francs for every hectolitre that his tenant sells.

Let us suppose for a moment that the price of corn is determined by the
labour time needed to produce it, and at once the hectolitre of corn
obtained from the better soil will sell at 10 francs, while the
hectolitre of corn obtained on the inferior soil will cost 20 francs.
This being admitted, the average market price will be 15 francs,
whereas, according to the law of competition, it is 20 francs. If the
average price were 15 francs, there would be no occasion for any
distribution, whether equalised or otherwise, for there would be no
rent. Rent exists only when one can sell for 20 francs the hectolitre of
corn which has cost the producer 10 francs. M. Proudhon supposes
equality of the market price, with unequal costs of production, in order
to arrive at an equalised sharing out of the product of inequality.

We understand such economists as Mill, Cherbuliez, Hilditch, and others
demanding that rent should be handed over to the state to serve in place
of taxes. That is a frank expression of the hatred the industrial
capitalist bears towards the landed proprietor, who seems to him a
useless thing, an excrescence upon the general body of bourgeois
production.

But first to make the price of the hectolitre of corn 20 francs in order
then to make a general distribution of the 10 francs overcharge levied
on the consumer, is indeed enough to make the social genius pursue its
zigzag course mournfully – and knock its head against some corner.

Rent becomes, under M. Proudhon’s pen,

“an immense land valuation, which is carried out contradictorily by
land- owners and farmers... in a higher interest, and whose ultimate
result must be to equalise the possession of land between exploiters of
the soil and the industrialists.” (Vol. II, p. 271)

For any land valuation based upon rent to be of practical value, the
conditions of present society must not be departed from.

Now, we have shown that the farm rent paid by the farmer to the landlord
expresses the rent with any exactitude only in the countries most
advanced in industry and commerce. And even this rent often includes
interest paid to the landlord on capital incorporated in the land. The
location of the land, the vicinity of towns, and many other
circumstances influence the farm rent and modify the ground rent. These
peremptory reasons would be enough to prove the inaccuracy of a land
valuation based on rent.

Thus history, far from supplying, in rent, a ready-made land valuation,
does nothing but change and turn topsy-turvy the land valuations already
made.

Finally, fertility is not so natural a quality as might be thought; it
is closely bound up with the social relations of the time. A piece of
land may be very fertile for corn growing, and yet the market price may
decide the cultivator to turn it into an artificial pastureland and thus
render it infertile.

M. Proudhon has improvised his land valuation, which has not even the
value of an ordinary land valuation, only to give substance to the
providentially equalitarian aim of rent.

“Rent,” continues M. Proudhon, “is the interest paid on a capital which
never perishes, namely – land. And as the capital is capable of no
increase in matter, but only of an indefinite improvement in its use, it
comes about that while the interest or profit on a loan (_mutuum_) tends
to diminish continually through abundance of capital, rent tends always
to increase through the perfecting of industry, from which results the
improvement in the use of the land.... Such, in its essence, is rent.”
(Vol. II, p. 265)

This time, M. Proudhon sees in rent all the characteristics of interest,
save that it is derived from capital of a specific nature. This capital
is land, an eternal capital, “which is capable of no increase in matter,
but only an indefinite improvement in its use.” In the progressive
advance of civilisation, interest has a continual tendency to fall,
whilst rent continually tends to rise. Interest falls because of the
abundance of capital; rent rises owing to the improvements brought about
in industry, which results in an ever better utilisation of land.

Such, in its essence, is the opinion of M. Proudhon.

Let us first examine how far it is true to say that rent is interest on
capital.

For the landed proprietor himself, rent represents the interest on the
capital that the land has cost him, or that he would draw from it if he
sold it. But in buying or selling land he only buys or sells rent. The
price he pays to make himself a receiver of rent is regulated by the
rate of interest in general and has nothing to do with actual nature of
rent. The interest on capital invested in land is in general lower than
the interest on capital invested in manufacture or commerce. Thus, for
those who make no distinction between the interest that the land
represents to the owner and the rent itself, the interest on land
capital diminishes still more than does the interest on other capital.
But it is not a question of the purchase or sale price of rent, of the
marketable value of rent, of capitalised rent, it is a question of rent
itself.

Farm rent can imply again, apart from rent proper, the interest on the
capital incorporated in the land. In this instance the landlord receives
this part of the farm rent, not as a landlord but as a capitalist; but
this is not the rent proper that we are to deal with.

Land, so long as it is not exploited as a means of production, is not
capital. Land as capital can be increased just as much as all the other
instruments of production. Nothing is added to its matter, to use M.
Proudhon’s language, but the lands which serve as instruments of
production are multiplied. The very fact of applying further outlays of
capital to land already transformed into means of production increases
land as capital without adding anything to land as matter – that is, to
the extent of the land. M. Proudhon’s land as matter is the Earth in its
limitation. As for the eternity he attributes to land, we grant readily
it has this virtue as matter. Land as capital is no more eternal than
any other capital.

Gold and silver, which yield interest, are just as lasting and eternal
as land. If the price of gold and silver falls, while that of land keeps
rising, this is certainly not because of its more or less eternal
nature.

Land as capital is fixed capital; but fixed capital gets used up just as
much as circulating capital. Improvements to the land need production
and upkeep; they last only for a time; and this they have in common with
all other improvements used to transform matter into means of
production. If land as capital were eternal, some lands would present a
very different appearance from what they do today, and we should see the
Roman Campagna, Sicily, Palestine, in all the splendour of their former
prosperity.

There are even instances when land as capital might disappear, even
though the improvements remain incorporated in the land.

In the first place, this occurs every time rent proper is wiped out by
the competition of new and more fertile soils; secondly, the
improvements which might have been valuable at one time cease to be of
value the moment they become universal owing to the development of
agronomy.

The representative of land as capital is not the landlord, but the
farmer. The proceeds yielded by land as capital are interest and
industrial profit, not rent. There are lands which yield such interest
and profit but still yield no rent.

Briefly, land in so far as it yields interest, is land capital, and as
land capital it yields no rent, it is not landed property. Rent results
from the social relations in which the exploitation of the land takes
place. It cannot be a result of the more or less solid, more or less
durable nature of the soil. Rent is a product of society and not of the
soil.

According to M. Proudhon, “improvement in the use of the land” – a
consequence “of the perfecting of industry” – causes the continual rise
in rent. On the contrary, this improvement causes its periodic fall.

Wherein consists, in general, any improvement, whether in agriculture or
in manufacture? In producing more with the same labour; in producing as
much, or even more, with less labour. Thanks to these improvements, the
farmer is spared from using a greater amount of labour for a relatively
smaller product. He has no need, therefore, to resort to inferior soils,
and instalments of capital applied successively to the same soil remain
equally productive.

Thus, these improvements, far from continually raising rent as M.
Proudhon says, become on the contrary so many temporary obstacles
preventing its rise.

The English landowners of the 17th century were so well aware of this
truth, that they opposed the progress of agriculture for fear of seeing
their incomes diminish. (See Petty, an English economist of the time of
Charles II.)

§ 5. Strikes and Combinations of Workers

“Every upward movement in wages can have no other effect than a rise in
the price of corn, wine, etc., that is, the effect of a dearth. For what
are wages? They are the cost price of corn, etc.; they are the integrant
price of everything. We may go even further: wages are the proportion of
the elements composing wealth and consumed reproductively every day by
the mass of the workers. Now, to double wages ... is to attribute to
each one of the producers a greater share than his product, which is
contradictory, and if the rise extends only to a small number of
industries, it brings a general disturbance in exchange; in a word, a
dearth.... It is impossible, I declare, for strikes followed by an
increase in wages not to culminate in a general rise in prices: this is
as certain as that two and two make four.” (Proudhon, Vol. I, pp. 110
and 111)

We deny all these assertions, except that two and two make four.

In the first place, there is no general rise in prices. If the price of
everything doubles at the same time as wages, there is no change in
price, the only change is in terms.

Then again, a general rise in wages can never produce a more or less
general rise in the price of goods. Actually, if every industry employed
the same number of workers in relation to fixed capital or to the
instruments used, a general rise in wages would produce a general fall
in profits and the current price of goods would undergo no alteration.

But as the relation of manual labour to fixed capital is not the same in
different industries, all the industries which employ a relatively
greater mass of capital and fewer workers, will be forced sooner or
later to lower the price of their goods. In the opposite case, in which
the price of their goods is not lowered, their profit will rise above
the common rate of profits. Machines are not wage-earners. Therefore,
the general rise in wages will affect less those industries, which,
compared with the others, employ more machines than workers. But as
competition always tends to level the rate of profits, those profits
which rise above the average rate cannot but be transitory. Thus, apart
from a few fluctuations, a general rise in wages will lead, not as M.
Proudhon says, to a general increase in prices, but to a partial fall –
that is a fall in the current price of the goods that are made chiefly
with the help of machines.

The rise and fall of profits and wages expresses merely the proportion
in which capitalists and workers share in the product of a day’s work,
without influencing in most instances the price of the product. But that
“strikes followed by an increase in wages culminate in a general rise in
prices, in a dearth even” – those are notions which can blossom only in
the brain of a poet who has not been understood.

In England, strikes have regularly given rise to the invention and
application of new machines. Machines were, it may be said, the weapon
employed by the capitalist to quell the revolt of specialised labour.
The self-acting mule, the greatest invention of modern industry, put out
of action the spinners who were in revolt. If combinations and strikes
had no other effect than that of making the efforts of mechanical genius
react against them, they would still exercise an immense influence on
the development of industry.

“I find,” continues M. Proudhon, “in an article published by M. Leon
Faucher... September 1845, that for some time the British workers have
got out of the habit of _combination_, which is assuredly a progress for
which one cannot but congratulate them: but this improvement in the
morale of the workers comes chiefly from their economic education. ‘It
is not on the manufacturers,’ cries a spinning-mill worker at a Bolton
meeting, ‘that wages depend. In periods of depression the masters are,
so to speak, merely the whip with which necessity arms itself, and
whether they want to or not, they have to deal blows. The regulative
principle is the relation of supply and demand; and the masters have not
this power’.... “Well done!” cries M. Proudhon. “These are well-trained
workers, model workers, etc., etc., etc. Such poverty did not exist in
Britain; it will not cross the Channel.” (Proudhon, Vol. I, pp. 261 and
262)

Of all the towns in England, Bolton is the one in which the radicalism
is the most developed. The Bolton workers are known to be the most
revolutionary of all. At the time of the great agitation in England for
the abolition of the Corn Laws, the English manufacturers thought that
they could cope with the landowners only by thrusting the workers to the
fore. But as the interests of the workers were no less opposed to those
of the manufacturers than the interests of the manufacturers were to
those of the landowners, it was natural that the manufacturers should
fare badly in the workers’ meetings. What did the manufacturers do? To
save appearances they organised meetings composed, to a large extent, of
foremen, of the small number of workers who were devoted to them, and of
the real friends of trade. When later on the genuine workers tried, as
in Bolton and Manchester, to take part in these sham demonstrations, in
order to protest against them, they were forbidden admittance on the
ground that it was a ticket meeting – a meeting to which only persons
with entrance cards were admitted. Yet the posters placarded on the
walls had announced public meetings. Every time one of these meetings
was held, the manufacturers’ newspapers gave a pompous and detailed
account of the speeches made. It goes without saying that it was the
foremen who made these speeches. The London papers reproduced them word
for word. M. Proudhon has the misfortune to take foremen for ordinary
workers, and enjoins them not to cross the Channel.

If in 1844 and 1845 strikes drew less attention than before, it was
because 1844 and 1845 were the first two years of prosperity that
British industry had had since 1837. Nevertheless none of the trades
unions had been dissolved.

Now let us listen to the foremen of Bolton. According to them
manufacturers have no command over wages because they have no command
over the price of products, and they have no command over the price of
products because they have no command over the world market. For this
reason, they wish it to be understood that combinations should not be
formed to extort an increase in wages from the masters. M. Proudhon, on
the contrary, forbids combinations for fear they should be followed by a
rise in wages which would bring with it a general dearth. We have no
need to say that on one point there is an _entente cordiale_ between the
foremen and M. Proudhon: that a rise in wages is equivalent to a rise in
the price of products.

But is the fear of a dearth the true cause of M. Proudhon’s rancour? No.
Quite simple, he is annoyed with the Bolton foremen because they
determine value by supply and demand and hardly take any account of
constituted value, of value which has passed into the state of
constitution, of the constitution of value, including permanent
exchangeability and all the other proportionalities of relations and
relations of proportionality, with Providence at their side.

“A workers’ strike is illegal, and it is not only the Penal Code that
says so, it is the economic system, the necessity of the established
order.... That each worker individually should dispose freely over his
person and his hands, this can be tolerated, but that workers should
undertake by combination to do violence to monopoly, is something
society cannot permit.” (Vol. I, pp. 334 and 335)

M. Proudhon wants to pass off an article of the Penal Code as a
necessary and general result of bourgeois relations of production.

In England, combination is authorised by an Act of Parliament, and it is
the economic system which has forced Parliament to grant this legal
authorisation. In 1825, when, under the Minister Huskisson, Parliament
had to modify the law in order to bring it more and more into line with
the conditions resulting from free competition, it had of necessity to
abolish all laws forbidding combinations of workers. The more modern
industry and competition develop, the more elements there are which call
forth and strengthen combination, and as soon as combination becomes an
economic fact, daily gaining in solidity, it is bound before long to
become a legal fact.

Thus the article of the Penal Code proves at the most that modern
industry and competition were not yet well developed under the
Constituent Assembly and under the Empire.[15]

Economists and socialists[16] are in agreement on one point: the
condemnation of combination. Only they have different motives for their
act of condemnation.

The economists say to workers:

Do not combine. By combination you hinder the regular progress of
industry, you prevent manufacturers from carrying out their orders, you
disturb trade and you precipitate the invasion of machines which, by
rendering your labour in part useless, force you to accept a still lower
wage. Besides, whatever you do, your wages will always be determined by
the relation of hands demanded to hands supplied, and it is an effort as
ridiculous as it is dangerous for you to revolt against the eternal laws
of political economy.

The socialists say to the workers:

Do not combine, because what will you gain by it anyway? A rise in
wages? The economists will prove to you quite clearly that the few
ha’pence you may gain by it for a few moments if you succeed will be
followed by a permanent fall. Skilled calculators will prove to you that
it would take you years merely to recover, through the increase in your
wages, the expenses incurred for the organisation and upkeep of the
combinations.

And we, as socialists, tell you that, apart from the money question, you
will continue nonetheless to be workers, and the masters will still
continue to be the masters, just as before. So no combination! No
politics! For is not entering into combination engaging in politics?

The economists want the workers to remain in society as it is
constituted and as it has been signed and sealed by them in their
manuals.

The socialists want the workers to leave the old society alone, the
better to be able to enter the new society which they have prepared for
them with so much foresight.

In spite of both of them, in spite of manuals and utopias, combination
has not yet ceased for an instant to go forward and grow with the
development and growth of modern industry. It has now reached such a
stage, that the degree to which combination has developed in any country
clearly marks the rank it occupies in the hierarchy of the world market.
England, whose industry has attained the highest degree of development,
has the biggest and best organised combinations.

In England, they have not stopped at partial combinations which have no
other objective than a passing strike, and which disappear with it.
Permanent combinations have been formed, trades unions, which serve as
ramparts for the workers in their struggles with the employers. And at
the present time all these local trades unions find a rallying point in
the National Association of United Trades, the central committee of
which is in London, and which already numbers 80,000 members. The
organisation of these strikes, combinations, and trades unions went on
simultaneously with the political struggles of the workers, who now
constitute a large political party, under the name of Chartists.

The first attempt of workers to associate among themselves always takes
place in the form of combinations.

Large-scale industry concentrates in one place a crowd of people unknown
to one another. Competition divides their interests. But the maintenance
of wages, this common interest which they have against their boss,
unites them in a common thought of resistance – _combination_. Thus
combination always has a double aim, that of stopping competition among
the workers, so that they can carry on general competition with the
capitalist. If the first aim of resistance was merely the maintenance of
wages, combinations, at first isolated, constitute themselves into
groups as the capitalists in their turn unite for the purpose of
repression, and in the face of always united capital, the maintenance of
the association becomes more necessary to them than that of wages. This
is so true that English economists are amazed to see the workers
sacrifice a good part of their wages in favour of associations, which,
in the eyes of these economists, are established solely in favour of
wages. In this struggle – a veritable civil war – all the elements
necessary for a coming battle unite and develop. Once it has reached
this point, association takes on a political character.

Economic conditions had first transformed the mass of the people of the
country into workers. The combination of capital has created for this
mass a common situation, common interests. This mass is thus already a
class as against capital, but not yet for itself. In the struggle, of
which we have noted only a few phases, this mass becomes united, and
constitutes itself as a class for itself. The interests it defends
become class interests. But the struggle of class against class is a
political struggle.

In the bourgeoisie we have two phases to distinguish: that in which it
constituted itself as a class under the regime of feudalism and absolute
monarchy, and that in which, already constituted as a class, it
overthrew feudalism and monarchy to make society into a bourgeois
society. The first of these phases was the longer and necessitated the
greater efforts. This too began by partial combinations against the
feudal lords.

Much research has been carried out to trace the different historical
phases that the bourgeoisie has passed through, from the commune up to
its constitution as a class.

But when it is a question of making a precise study of strikes,
combinations and other forms in which the proletarians carry out before
our eyes their organisation as a class, some are seized with real fear
and others display _a transcendental_ disdain.

An oppressed class is the vital condition for every society founded on
the antagonism of classes. The emancipation of the oppressed class thus
implies necessarily the creation of a new society. For the oppressed
class to be able to emancipate itself, it is necessary that the
productive powers already acquired and the existing social relations
should no longer be capable of existing side by side. Of all the
instruments of production, the greatest productive power is the
revolutionary class itself. The organisation of revolutionary elements
as a class supposes the existence of all the productive forces which
could be engendered in the bosom of the old society.

Does this mean that after the fall of the old society there will be a
new class domination culminating in a new political power? No.

The condition for the emancipation of the working class is the abolition
of every class, just as the condition for the liberation of the third
estate, of the bourgeois order, was the abolition of all estates and all
orders.[17]

The working class, in the course of its development, will substitute for
the old civil society an association which will exclude classes and
their antagonism, and there will be no more political power properly
so-called, since political power is precisely the official expression of
antagonism in civil society.

Meanwhile the antagonism between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie is
a struggle of class against class, a struggle which carried to its
highest expression is a total revolution. Indeed, is it at all
surprising that a society founded on the _opposition_ of classes should
culminate in brutal _contradiction_, the shock of body against body, as
its final _dénouement_?

Do not say that social movement excludes political movement. There is
never a political movement which is not at the same time social.

It is only in an order of things in which there are no more classes and
class antagonisms that _social evolutions_ will cease to be _political
revolutions_. Till then, on the eve of every general reshuffling of
society, the last word of social science will always be:

“Le combat ou la mort; la lutte sanguinaire ou le néant. C’est ainsi que
la quéstion est invinciblement posée.” [From the novel _Jean Ziska_ by
George Sand: “Combat or Death: bloody struggle or extinction. It is thus
that the question is inexorably put.”]

[1] ^(*) At least this was the case until recently. Since England’s
monopoly of the world market is being increasingly shattered by the
participation of France, Germany and, above all, America in world trade,
a new form of evening-out appears to come into operation. The period of
general prosperity preceding the crisis still fails to appear. If it
should remain absent altogether, then chronic stagnation must
necessarily become the normal condition of modern industry, with only
insignificant fluctuations. – Note by Engels.

[2] ^(*) Ricardo, as is well known, determines the value of a commodity
by the quantity of labour necessary for its production. Owing, however,
to the prevailing form of exchange in every mode of production based on
production of commodities, including therefore the capitalist mode of
production, this value is not expressed directly in quantities of labour
but in quantities of some other commodity. The value of a commodity
expressed in a quantity of some other commodity (whether money or not)
is termed by Ricardo its relative value. [Note by Engels to 1885 German
edition]

[3] ^(*) The thesis that the “natural,” i.e., normal, price of labour
power coincides with the minimum wage, i.e., with the equivalent in
value of the means of subsistence absolutely indispensable for the life
and procreation of the worker, was first put forward by me in _Outlines
of a Critique of Political Economy (Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher,_
Paris, 1844) and in _The Condition of the Working Class in England in
1844._ As seen here, Marx at that time accepted the thesis. Lassalle
took it over from both of us. Although, however, in reality wages have a
constant tendency to approach the minimum, the above thesis is
nevertheless incorrect. The fact that labour is regularly and on the
average paid below its value cannot alter its value. In _Capital_, Marx
has put the above thesis right (Section on _Buying and Selling of Labour
Power)_ and also _(Chapter XXV: The General Law of Capitalist
Accumulation)_ analysed the circumstances which permit capitalist
production to depress the price of labour power more and more below its
value. [Note by Engels to 1885 German edition]

[4] ^(*) In the copy Marx presented to N. Utina in 1876 after this word
“labour” Marx adds “labour power;” this addition is found in the 1896
French edition.

[5] The Ten Hours’ Bill, which applied only to women and children, was
passed by the British Parliament on June 8, 1847. Many manufacturers,
however, ignored the law in practice. – Ed.

[6] ^(*) Mr. Bray’s theory, like all theories, has found supporters who
have allowed themselves to be deluded by appearances. Equitable
labour-exchange bazaars have been set up in London, Sheffield, Leeds and
many other towns in England. These bazaars have all ended in scandalous
failures after having absorbed considerable capital. The taste for them
has gone for ever. You are warned, M. Proudhon! [Note by Marx]

It is known that Proudhon did not take this warning to heart. In 1849 he
himself made an attempt with a new Exchange Bank in Paris. The bank,
however, failed before it had got going properly; a court case against
Proudhon had to serve to cover its collapse. [Note by F. Engels to the
German edition of 1885]

[7] ^(*) This was perfectly correct for the year 1847. At that time the
world trade of the United States was limited mainly to import of
immigrants and industrial products, and export of cotton and tobacco,
i.e., of the products of southern slave labour. The Northern States
produced mainly corn and meat for the slave states. It was only when the
North produced corn and meat for export and also became an industrial
country, and when the American cotton monopoly had to face powerful
competition, in India, Egypt, Brazil, etc., that the abolition of
slavery became possible. And even then this led to the ruin of the
South, which did not succeed in replacing the open Negro slavery by the
disguised slavery of Indian and Chinese coolies. [Note by Engels to the
1885 German edition]

[8] ^(*) Lemontey alludes to his book: Raison, folie, chacun son mot;
petit cours de morale mis à la portée des vieux enfants (Reason, Folly,
to Each His Own Word; a Short Course in Morality Within the Mental Reach
of Old Children), Paris, 1801. Marx quotes Lemontey’s work Influence
morale de la division du travail (The Moral Influence of the Division of
Labour), in which Lemontey refers to the above book.

[9] ^(*) The Fourierists. [Note by Engels to 1885 German edition]

[10] ^(*) The Man of Forty Ecus is the hero of Voltaire’s story of the
same name. He is a modest, hard-working peasant with an annual income of
40 écus (silver coins used in France in the 17th-18th centuries). The
next passage is quoted from the story.

[11] Literally, god out of the machine, a reference to actors in
theatres of antiquity who made their appearance by stage machinery.
Figuratively, a person who appears unexpectedly to save a situation. –
Ed.

[12] _Propriété_ (property) is explained by the intervention of the
_propriétaire_ (proprietor), and _rente_ (rent), by the intervention of
the _rentier_ (rent-receiver). – Ed.

[13] In the copy presented by Marx to N. Utina, the beginning of the
sentence was altered as follows: “For the Ricardian doctrine, once the
premises granted, to be generally true, it is moreover essential that…”
– Ed.

[14] In the copy presented to N. Utina, the words “on inferior land”
were altered to “on the land.” – Ed.

[15] The laws in operation at that time in France – the so-called Le
Chapelier law adopted by the Constituent Assembly in 1791 during the
revolution and the criminal code elaborated under the Napoleonic Empire
– forbade the workers to form labour unions or to go on strike. The
prohibition of trade unions was abolished in France in 1884.

[16] That is, the socialists of that time: the Fourierists in France,
the Owenites in England. [Note by Engels to the 1885 German edition]

[17] ^(*) Estates here in the historical sense of the estates of
feudalism, estates with definite and limited privileges. The revolution
of the bourgeoisie abolished the estates and their privileges. Bourgeois
society knows only _classes._ It was, therefore, absolutely in
contradiction with history to describe the proletariat as the “fourth
estate.” [Engels, 1885 German edition]
