Table of Contents

Value, Price and Profit, Karl Marx 1865

Introduction

Preface by Edward Aveling

Chapters 1-5

Chapters 6-10

Chapters 11-14

Notes

[marx in 1867]

Speech by Marx to the
First International Working Men's Association, June 1865


Value, Price and Profit

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Source: Marx, Karl. _Value, Price and Profit_. New York: International
Co., Inc, 1969;
Written: between end of May and June 27, 1865;
First published: 1898;
Edited: by Eleanor Marx Aveling;
HTML Mark-up: Mike Ballard, miballard@stanford.edu, 1995; Proofed: and
corrected by Brandon Poole, 2009, Mark Harris 2010.
eBook prepared by: J Eduardo Brissos 2011.

Introduction

------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Preface by Edward Aveling

    Preliminary
 1. Production and Wages
 2. Production, Wages, Profits
 3. Wages and Currency
 4. Supply and Demand
 5. Wages and Prices
 6. Value and Labour
 7. Labour Power
 8. Production of Surplus Value
 9. Value of Labour
10. Profit is made by Selling a Commodity at its Value
11. The different Parts into which Surplus Value is Decomposed
12. The General Relation of Profits, Wages, and Prices
13. Main cases of Attempts at Raising Wages or Resisting their Fall
14. The Struggle between Capital and Labour, and its Results

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Study Guide | Notes by Marx
Marx Engels Archive | Economics Index


Introduction

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Source: Marx, Karl. _Value, Price and Profit_. New York: International
Co., Inc, 1969.
Transcribed: by Brandon Poole.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The present work is an address delivered by Karl Marx at two sessions of
the General Council of the First International on June 20 and 27, 1865.
The circumstances which led to this report are briefly as follows:

At the session of the General Council on April 4, 1865, John Weston, an
influential member of the General Council and English workers’
representative, proposed that the General Council should discuss the
following questions:

1.  Can the social and material prospects of the working class be in
    general improved by wage increases?
2.  Do not the efforts of the trade unions to secure increases have a
    harmful effect on other branches of industry?

Weston declared that he would uphold a negative answer to the first
question and a positive answer to the second one.

Weston’s report was delivered and discussed at the session of the
Council on May 2 and 20. In a letter to Engels of May 20, 1865, Marx
refers to this as follows:

“This evening a special session of the International. A good old fellow,
an old Owenist, _Weston_ (carpenter) has put forward the two following
propositions, which he is continually defending in the _Beehive:_ (1)
that a general rise in the rate of wages would be of no use to the
workers; (2) that therefore, etc., the trade unions have a _harmful_
effect.

“If these two propositions, in which _he_ alone in our society believes,
were accepted, we should be turned into a joke both on account of the
trade unions here and of the _infection of strikes_^([1]) which now
prevails on the Continent. ... I am, of course, expected to supply
refutation. I ought really therefore to have worked out my reply for
this evening, but thought it more important to write on at my book^([2])
and so shall have to depend upon improvisation.

“Of course I know beforehand what the two main points are: (1) That the
_wages of labour_ determine the value of commodities, (2) that if the
capitalists pay five instead of four shillings today, they will sell
their commodities for five instead of four shillings tomorrow (being
enabled to do so by the increased demand).

“Inane though this is, only attaching itself to the most superficial
external appearance, it is nevertheless not easy to explain to ignorant
people all the economic questions which compete with one another here.
_You can’t compress a course of political economy into one hour. But we
shall have to do our best._”^([3])

At the session of May 20, Weston’s views were subjected to a smashing
criticism by Marx, and Wheeler, a representative of the English trade
unions on the General Council, also spoke against Weston. Marx did no
confine himself to “improvisation,” but proceeded to deliver a
counter-report. Proposals were made at the sessions of the Central
Council to publish the reports of Marx and Weston. In connection with
the Marx wrote as Follows to Engels on June 24:

I have read a paper in the Central Council (it would make two printer’s
sheets^([4]) perhaps) on the question brought up by Mr. Weston as to the
effect of a general rise of wages, etc. The first part of it was an
answer to Weston’s nonsense; the second, a theoretical explanation, in
so far as the occasion was suited to this.

Now the people want to have this printed. On the one hand, this might
perhaps be useful, since they are connected with John Stuart Mill,
Professor Beasley, Harrison, etc. On the other hand I have the following
doubts: (1) It is none too flattering to have Mister Weston as one’s
opponent; (2) in the second part the thing contains, in an extremely
condensed but relatively popular form, much that is new, taken in
advance from my book, while at the same time it has necessarily to slur
over all sorts of things. The question is, whether such anticipation is
expedient?

The work, however, was not published either by Marx or Engels. It was
found among Marx’s papers after Engels’ death and published by Marx’s
daughter, Eleanor Aveling. In the English language it was published
under the title of _Value, Price and Profit_, while the German
translation bore the title of _Wages, Price and Profit_.

This work, as Marx himself noted, falls into two parts. In the first
part, Marx, while criticizing Weston, is at the same time essentially
attacking the so-called “theory of wages fund,” which had been presented
in the main by Weston in his report, and which had John Stuart Mill as
its most formidable supporter.

The gist if the theory of wages fund is the assertion that the capital
which may be expended in any given period for the payment of wages is a
rigid and definite sum which cannot be augmented; and that therefore the
wages of each worker are arrived at by dividing up this wages fund
amount the total number of workers in the country. From this theory it
would follow that the struggle of the working class to raise wages is
inexpedient and even harmful. This theory was thus a weapon in the hands
of employers in their struggle against the working masses. From the
denial of the expediency of the economic struggle, this theory leads
directly to a denial of the expediency of the political struggle of the
workers, of the struggle against capitalism and consequently preaches to
the workers political abstinence, and, at best, political subservience
to the tutelage and leadership of the bourgeoisie. By presenting such
views at the sessions of the General Council, Weston showed himself to
be essentially a mouthpiece of bourgeoisie views. This was why Marx
deemed it necessary to subject Weston’s views to an annihilating
criticism in a special counter-report. The subject dealt with by Marx
has lost none of its actuality at the present day. The ideas underlying
the theory of “wage fund” continue to be put forward in more or less
disguised forms, not only by capitalist economists but also by the
social fascist trade union and reformist leadership in their arguments
for acceptance of wage cuts.

In the second part of the present work Marx give popular exposition of
the fundamental theses of the theories of value and surplus value and of
the conclusions derived from these theories. As is mentioned by Marx in
his letter to Engels, this part contains an exposition of several theses
from his book _Capital_ on which he was working at the time. Although it
is so condensed, this part of the work nevertheless constitutes a model
of lucid exposition and a consummate popularization of the economic
theory of Marx. A study of this pamphlet is still the best introduction
to Marx’s _Capital_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. This phrase was written in English. – _Ed_.

2. _Capital. – Ed._

3. K. Marx and F. Engels, _Correspondence_ 1846-1895, pp. 202-203. –
_Ed._

4. One sheet is 16 printed pages. – _Ed._



PREFACE


The circumstances under which this paper was read are narrated at the
beginning of the work. The paper was never published during the lifetime
of Marx. It was found amongst his papers after the death of Engels.
Among many other characteristics of Marx, this paper shows two
especially. These are his patient willingness to make the meaning of his
ideas plain to the humblest student, and the extraordinary clearness of
those ideas. In a partial sense the present volume is an epitome of the
first volume of Capital. More than one of us have attempted to analyze
and simplify that volume, with not too much success perhaps. In fact, a
witty friend and commentator has suggested that what is now required is
an explanation by Marx of our explanations of him. I am often asked what
is the best succession of books for the student to acquire the
fundamental principles of Socialism. The question is a difficult one to
answer. But, by way of suggestion, one might say, first, Engels'
_Socialism, Scientific And Utopian_, then the present work, the first
volume of Capital, and the Student's Marx. My small part in the
preparation of this work has been reading the manuscript, making a few
suggestions as to English forms of expression, dividing the work up into
chapters and naming the chapters, and revising the proofs for press. All
the rest, and by far the most important part, of the work has been done
by her whose name appears on the title page. The present volume has
already been translated into German.

Edward Aveling.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


Preliminary

CITIZENS,

Before entering into the subject-matter, allow me to make a few
preliminary remarks. There reigns now on the Continent a real epidemic
of strikes, and a general clamour for a rise of wages. The question will
turn up at our Congress. You, as the head of the International
Association, ought to have settled convictions upon this paramount
question. For my own part, I considered it therefore my duty to enter
fully into the matter, even at the peril of putting your patience to a
severe test.

Another preliminary remark I have to make in regard to Citizen Weston.
He has not only proposed to you, but has publicly defended, in the
interest of the working class, as he thinks, opinions he knows to be
most unpopular with the working class. Such an exhibition of moral
courage all of us must highly honour. I hope that, despite the
unvarnished style of my paper, at its conclusion he will find me
agreeing with what appears to me the just idea lying at the bottom of
his theses, which, however, in their present form, I cannot but consider
theoretically false and practically dangerous.

I shall now at once proceed to the business before us.


I. Production and Wages

Citizen Weston's argument rested, in fact, upon two premises: firstly,
the amount of national production is a fixed thing, a constant quantity
or magnitude, as the mathematicians would say; secondly, that the amount
of real wages, that is to say, of wages as measured by the quantity of
the commodities they can buy, is a fixed amount, a constant magnitude.

Now, his first assertion is evidently erroneous. Year after year you
will find that the value and mass of production increase, that the
productive powers of the national labour increase, and that the amount
of money necessary to circulate this increasing production continuously
changes. What is true at the end of the year, and for different years
compared with each other, is true for every average day of the year. The
amount or magnitude of national production changes continuously. It is
not a constant but a variable magnitude, and apart from changes in
population it must be so, because of the continuous change in the
accumulation of capital and the productive powers of labour. It is
perfectly true that if a rise in the general rate of wages should take
place today, that rise, whatever its ulterior effects might be, would,
by itself, not immediately change the amount of production. It would, in
the first instance, proceed from the existing state of things. But if
before the rise of wages the national production was variable, and not
fixed, it will continue to be variable and not fixed after the rise of
wages.

But suppose the amount of national production to be constant instead of
variable. Even then, what our friend Weston considers a logical
conclusion would still remain a gratuitous assertion. If I have a given
number, say eight, the absolute limits of this number do not prevent its
parts from changing their relative limits. If profits were six and wages
two, wages might increase to six and profits decrease to two, and still
the total amount remain eight. The fixed amount of production would by
no means prove the fixed amount of wages. How then does our friend
Weston prove this fixity? By asserting it.

But even conceding him his assertion, it would cut both ways, while he
presses it only in one direction. If the amount of wages is a constant
magnitude, then it can be neither increased nor diminished. If then, in
enforcing a temporary rise of wages, the working men act foolishly, the
capitalists, in enforcing a temporary fall of wages, would act not less
foolishly. Our friend Weston does not deny that, under certain
circumstances, the working men _can_ enforce a rise of wages, but their
amount being naturally fixed, there must follow a reaction. On the other
hand, he knows also that the capitalists _can_ enforce a fall of wages,
and, indeed, continuously try to enforce it. According to the principle
of the constancy of wages, a reaction ought to follow in this case not
less than in the former. The working men, therefore, reacting against
the attempt at, or the act of, lowering wages, would act rightly. They
would, therefore, act rightly in enforcing _a rise of wages_, because
every _reaction_ against the lowering of wages is an _action_ for
raising wages. According to Citizen Weston's own principle of the
_constancy of wages_, the working men ought, therefore, under certain
circumstances, to combine and struggle for a rise of wages. If he denies
this conclusion, he must give up the premise from which it flows. He
must not say that the amount of wages is a _constant quantity_, but
that, although it cannot and must not _rise_, it can and must _fall_,
whenever capital pleases to lower it. If the capitalist pleases to feed
you upon potatoes instead of upon meat, and upon oats instead of upon
wheat, you must accept his will as a law of political economy, and
submit to it. If in one country the rate of wages is higher than in
another, in the United States, for example, than in England, you must
explain this difference in the rate of wages by a difference between the
will of the American capitalist and the will of the English capitalist,
a method which would certainly very much simplify, not only the study of
economic phenomena, but of all other phenomena.

But even then, we might ask, _why_ the will of the American capitalist
differs from the will of the English capitalist? And to answer the
question you must go beyond the domain of _will_. A person may tell me
that God wills one thing in France, and another thing in England. If I
summon him to explain this duality of will, he might have the brass to
answer me that God wills to have one will in France and another will in
England. But our friend Weston is certainly the last man to make an
argument of such a complete negation of all reasoning.

The _will_ of the capitalist is certainly to take as much as possible.
What we have to do is not to talk about his _will_, but to enquire into
his _power_, the _limits of that power_, and the _character of those
limits_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


II. Production, Wages, Profits

The address Citizen Weston read to us might have been compressed into a
nutshell.

All his reasoning amounted to this: If the working class forces the
capitalist class to pay five shillings instead of four shillings in the
shape of money wages, the capitalist will return in the shape of
commodities four shillings' worth instead of five shillings' worth. The
working class would have to pay five shillings for what, before the rise
of wages, they bought with four shillings. But why is this the case? Why
does the capitalist only return four shillings' worth for five
shillings? Because the amount of wages is fixed. By why is it fixed at
four shillings' worth of commodities? Why not at three, or two, or any
other sum? If the limit of the amount of wages is settled by an
economical law, independent alike of the will of the capitalist and the
will of the working man, the first thing Citizen Weston had to do was to
state that law and prove it. He ought then, moreover, to have proved
that the amount of wages actually paid at every given moment always
corresponds exactly to the necessary amount of wages, and never deviates
from it. If, on the other hand, the given limit of the amount of wages
is founded on the _mere will_ of the capitalist, or the limits of his
avarice, it is an arbitrary limit. There is nothing necessary in it. It
may be changed _by_ the will of the capitalist, and may, therefore, be
changed _against_ his will.

Citizen Weston illustrated his theory by telling you that a bowl
contains a certain quantity of soup, to be eaten by a certain number of
persons, an increase in the broadness of the spoons would produce no
increase in the amount of soup. He must allow me to find this
illustration rather spoony. It reminded me somewhat of the simile
employed by Menenius Agrippa. When the Roman plebeians struck against
the Roman patricians, the patrician Agrippa told them that the patrician
belly fed the plebeian members of the body politic. Agrippa failed to
show that you feed the members of one man by filling the belly of
another. Citizen Weston, on his part, has forgotten that the bowl from
which the workmen eat is filled with the whole produce of national
labour, and that what prevents them fetching more out of it is neither
the narrowness of the bowl nor the scantiness of its contents, but only
the smallness of their spoons.

By what contrivance is the capitalist enabled to return four shillings'
worth for five shillings? By raising the price of the commodity he
sells. Now, does a rise and more generally a change in the prices of
commodities, do the prices of commodities themselves, depend on the mere
will of the capitalist? Or are, on the contrary, certain circumstances
wanted to give effect to that will? If not, the ups and downs, the
incessant fluctuations of market prices, become an insoluble riddle.

As we suppose that no change whatever has taken place either in the
productive powers of labour, or in the amount of capital and labour
employed, or in the value of the money wherein the values of products
are estimated, but _only a change in the rate of wages_, how could that
_rise of wages_ affect the _prices of commodities_? Only by affecting
the actual proportion between the demand for, and the supply of these
commodities.

It is perfectly true that, considered as a whole, the working class
spends, and must spend, its income upon _necessaries_. A general rise in
the rate of wages would, therefore, produce a rise in the demand for,
and consequently in the _market prices of necessaries_. The capitalists
who produce these necessaries would be compensated for the risen wages
by the rising market prices of their commodities. But how with the other
capitalists who do _not_ produce necessaries? And you must not fancy
them a small body. If you consider that two-thirds of the national
produce are consumed by one-fifth of the population — a member of the
House of Commons stated it recently to be but one-seventh of the
population — you will understand what an immense proportion of the
national produce must be produced in the shape of luxuries, or be
_exchanged_ for luxuries, and what an immense amount of the necessaries
themselves must be wasted upon flunkeys, horses, cats, and so forth, a
waste we know from experience to become always much limited with the
rising prices of necessaries.

Well, what would be the position of those capitalists who do _not_
produce necessaries? For the _fall in the rate of profit_, consequent
upon the general rise of wages, they could not compensate themselves by
a _rise in the price of their commodities_, because the demand for those
commodities would not have increased. Their income would have decreased,
and from this decreased income they would have to pay more for the same
amount of higher-priced necessaries. But this would not be all. As their
income had diminished they would have less to spend upon luxuries, and
therefore their mutual demand for their respective commodities would
diminish. Consequent upon this diminished demand the prices of their
commodities would fall. In these branches of industry, therefore, _the
rate of profit would fall_, not only in simple proportion to the general
rise in the rate of wages, but in the compound ratio of the general rise
of wages, the rise in the prices of necessaries, and the fall in the
prices of luxuries.

What would be the consequence of _this difference in the rates of
profit_ for capitals employed in the different branches of industry?
Why, the consequence that generally obtains whenever, from whatever
reason, the _average rate of profit_ comes to differ in different
spheres of production. Capital and labour would be transferred from the
less remunerative to the more remunerative branches; and this process of
transfer would go on until the supply in the one department of industry
would have risen proportionately to the increased demand, and would have
sunk in the other departments according to the decreased demand. This
change effected, the general rate of profit would again be _equalized_
in the different branches. As the whole derangement originally arose
from a mere change in the proportion of the demand for, and supply of,
different commodities, the cause ceasing, the effect would cease, and
PRICES would return to their former level and equilibrium. Instead of
being limited to some branches of industry, _the fall in the rate of
profit_ consequent upon the rise of wages would have become general.
According to our supposition, there would have taken place no change in
the productive powers of labour, nor in the aggregate amount of
production, but _that given amount of production would have changed its
form_. A greater part of the produce would exist in the shape of
necessaries, a lesser part in the shape of luxuries, or what comes to
the same, a lesser part would be exchanged for foreign luxuries, and be
consumed in its original form, or, what again comes to the same, a
greater part of the native produce would be exchanged for foreign
necessaries instead of for luxuries. The general rise in the rate of
wages would, therefore, after a temporary disturbance of market prices,
only result in a general fall of the rate of profit without any
permanent change in the prices of commodities. If I am told that in the
previous argument I assume the whole surplus wages to be spent upon
necessaries, I answer that I have made the supposition most advantageous
to the opinion of Citizen Weston. If the surplus wages were spent upon
articles formerly not entering into the consumption of the working men,
the real increase of their purchasing power would need no proof. Being,
however, only derived from an advance of wages, that increase of their
purchasing power must exactly correspond to the decrease of the
purchasing power of the capitalists. The _aggregate demand_ for
commodities would, therefore, not _increase_, but the constituent parts
of that demand would _change_. The increasing demand on the one side
would be counterbalanced by the decreasing demand on the other side.
Thus the aggregate demand remaining stationary, no change whatever could
take place in the market prices of commodities. You arrive, therefore,
at this dilemma: Either the surplus wages are equally spent upon all
articles of consumption — then the expansion of demand on the part of
the working class must be compensated by the contraction of demand on
the part of the capitalist class — or the surplus wages are only spent
upon some articles whose market prices will temporarily rise. The
consequent rise in the rate of profit in some, and the consequent fall
in the rate of profit in other branches of industry will produce a
change in the distribution of capital and labour, going on until the
supply is brought up to the increased demand in the one department of
industry, and brought down to the diminished demand in the other
departments of industry. On the one supposition there will occur no
change in the prices of commodities. On the other supposition, after
some fluctuations of market prices, the exchangeable values of
commodities will subside to the former level. On both suppositions the
general rise in the rate of wages will ultimately result in nothing else
but a general fall in the rate of profit.

To stir up your powers of imagination Citizen Weston requested you to
think of the difficulties which a general rise of English agricultural
wages from nine shillings to eighteen shillings would produce. Think, he
exclaimed, of the immense rise in the demand for necessaries, and the
consequent fearful rise in their prices! Now, all of you know that the
average wages of the American agricultural labourer amount to more than
double that of the English agricultural labourer, although the prices of
agricultural produce are lower in the United States than in the United
Kingdom, although the general relations of capital and labour obtain in
the United States the same as in England, and although the annual amount
of production is much smaller in the United States than in England. Why,
then, does our friend ring this alarm bell? Simply to shift the real
question before us. A sudden rise of wages from nine shillings to
eighteen shillings would be a sudden rise to the amount of 100 percent.
Now, we are not at all discussing the question whether the general rate
of wages in England could be suddenly increased by 100 percent. We have
nothing at all to do with the _magnitude_ of the rise, which in every
practical instance must depend on, and be suited to, given
circumstances. We have only to inquire how a general rise in the rate of
wages, even if restricted to one percent, will act.

Dismissing friend Weston's fancy rise of 100 percent, I propose calling
your attention to the real rise of wages that took place in Great
Britain from 1849 to 1859.

You are all aware of the Ten Hours Bill, or rather Ten-and-a-half Hours
Bill, introduced since 1848. This was one of the greatest economical
changes we have witnessed. It was a sudden and compulsory rise of wages,
not in some local trades, but in the leading industrial branches by
which England sways the markets of the world. It was a rise of wages
under circumstances singularly unpropitious. Dr. Ure, Professor Senior,
and all the other official economical mouthpieces of the middle class,
[The aristocracy was the upper class of Great Britain, while the
capitalists composed what was known to Marx as the middle class]
_proved_, and I must say upon much stronger grounds than those of our
friend Weston, that it would sound the death-knell of English industry.
They proved that it not only amounted to a simple rise of wages, but to
a rise of wages initiated by, and based upon, a diminution of the
quantity of labour employed. They asserted that the twelfth hour you
wanted to take from the capitalist was exactly the only hour from which
he derived his profit. They threatened a decrease of accumulation, rise
of prices, loss of markets, stinting of production, consequent reaction
upon wages, ultimate ruin. In fact, they declared Maximillian
Robespierre's Maximum Laws^([1]) to be a small affair compared to it;
and they were right in a certain sense. Well, what was the result? A
rise in the money wages of the factory operatives, despite the
curtailing of the working day, a great increase in the number of factory
hands employed, a continuous fall in the prices of their products, a
marvellous development in the productive powers of their labour, an
unheard-of progressive expansion of the markets for their commodities.
In Manchester, at the meeting, in 1860, of the Society for the
Advancement of Science, I myself heard Mr. Newman confess that he, Dr.
Ure, Senior, and all other official propounders of economical science
had been wrong, while the instinct of the people had been right. I
mention Mr. W. Newman, not Professor Francis Newman, because he occupies
an eminent position in economical science, as the contributor to, and
editor of, Mr. Thomas Tooke's _History Of Prices_, that magnificent work
which traces the history of prices from 1793 to 1856. If our friend
Weston's fixed idea of a fixed amount of wages, a fixed amount of
production, a fixed degree of the productive power of labour, a fixed
and permanent will of the capitalist, and all his other fixedness and
finality were correct, Professor Senior's woeful forebodings would been
right, and Robert Owen^([2]), who already in 1816 proclaimed a general
limitation of the working day the first preparatory step to the
emancipation of the working class, and actually in the teeth of the
general prejudice inaugurated it on his own hook in his cotton factory
at New Lanark, would have been wrong.

In the very same period during which the introduction of the Ten Hours
Bill, and the rise of wages consequent upon it, occurred, there took
place in Great Britain, for reasons which it would be out of place to
enumerate here, _a general rise in agricultural wages_. Although it is
not required for my immediate purpose, in order not to mislead you, I
shall make some preliminary remarks.

If a man got two shillings weekly wages, and if his wages rose to four
shillings, the _rate of wages_ would have risen by 100 per cent. This
would seem a very magnificent thing if expressed as a rise in the _rate
of wages_, although the _actual amount of wages_, four shillings weekly,
would still remain a wretchedly small, a starvation pittance. You must
not, therefore, allow yourselves to be carried away by the high sounding
per cents in _rate_ of wages. You must always ask: What was the
_original_ amount?

Moreover, you will understand, that if there were ten men receiving each
2s. per week, five men receiving each 5s., and five men receiving 11s.
weekly, the twenty men together would receive 100s., or 5 Pounds,
weekly. If then a rise, say by 20 per cent, upon the _aggregate_ sum of
their weekly wages took place, there would be an advance from 5 Pounds
to 6 Pounds. Taking the average, we might say that the _general rate of
wages_ had risen by 25 per cent, although, in fact, the wages of the ten
men had remained stationary, the wages of the one lot of five men had
risen from 5s. to 6s. only, and the wages of the other lot of five from
55s. to 70s.^([3]) One half of the men would not have improved at all
their position, one quarter would have improved it in an imperceptible
degree, and only one quarter would have bettered it really. Still,
reckoning by the _average_, the total amount of the wages of those
twenty men would have increased by 25 per cent, and as far as the
aggregate capital that employs them, and the prices of the commodities
they produce, are concerned, it would be exactly the same as if all of
them had equally shared in the average rise of wages. In the case of
agricultural labour, the standard wages being very different in the
different counties of England and Scotland, the rise affected them very
unequally.

Lastly, during the period when that rise of wages took place
counteracting influences were at work such as the new taxes consequent
upon the Russian war, the extensive demolition of the dwelling-houses of
the agricultural labourers, and so forth. Having premised so much, I
proceed to state that from 1849 to 1859 there took place a _rise of
about 40 percent_ in the average rate of the agricultural wages of Great
Britain. I could give you ample details in proof of my assertion, but
for the present purpose think it sufficient to refer you to the
conscientious and critical paper read in 1860 by the late Mr. John C.
Morton at the London Society of Arts on “The Forces used in
Agriculture.” Mr. Morton gives the returns, from bills and other
authentic documents, which he had collected from about one hundred
farmers, residing in twelve Scotch and thirty-five English counties.

According to our friend Weston's opinion, and taken together with the
simultaneous rise in the wages of the factory operatives, there ought to
have occurred a tremendous rise in the prices of agricultural produce
during the period 1849 to 1859. But what is the fact? Despite the
Russian war, and the consecutive unfavourable harvests from 1854 to
1856, the average price of wheat, which is the leading agricultural
produce of England, fell from about 3 Pounds per quarter for the years
1838 to 1848 to about 2 Pounds 10 Shillings per quarter for the years
1849 to 1859. This constitutes a fall in the price of wheat of more than
16 percent simultaneously with an average rise of agricultural wages of
40 percent. During the same period, if we compare its end with its
beginning, 1859 with 1849, there was a decrease of official pauperism
from 934,419 to 860,470, the difference being 73,949; a very small
decrease, I grant, and which in the following years was again lost, but
still a decrease.

It might be said that, consequent upon the abolition of the Corn Laws,
the import of foreign corn was more than doubled during the period from
1849 to 1859, as compared with the period from 1838 to 1848. And what of
that? From Citizen Weston's standpoint one would have expected that this
sudden, immense, and continuously increasing demand upon foreign markets
must have sent up the prices of agricultural produce there to a
frightful height, the effect of increased demand remaining the same,
whether it comes from without or from within. What was the fact? Apart
from some years of failing harvests, during all that period the ruinous
fall in the price of corn formed a standing theme of declamation in
France; the Americans were again and again compelled to burn their
surplus produce; and Russia, if we are to believe Mr. Urquhart, prompted
the Civil War in the United States because her agricultural exports were
crippled by the Yankee competition in the markets of Europe.

_Reduced to its abstract form_, Citizen Weston's argument would come to
this: Every rise in demand occurs always on the basis of a given amount
of production. It can, therefore, _never increase the supply of the
articles demanded_, but can _only enhance their money prices_. Now the
most common observation shows than an increased demand will, in some
instances, leave the market prices of commodities altogether unchanged,
and will, in other instances, cause a temporary rise of market prices
followed by an increased supply, followed by a reduction of the prices
to their original level, and in many cases _below_ their original level.
Whether the rise of demand springs from surplus wages, or from any other
cause, does not at all change the conditions of the problem. From
Citizen Weston's standpoint the general phenomenon was as difficult to
explain as the phenomenon occurring under the exceptional circumstances
of a rise of wages. His argument had, therefore, no peculiar bearing
whatever upon the subject we treat. It only expressed his perplexity at
accounting for the laws by which an increase of demand produces an
increase of supply, instead of an ultimate rise of market prices.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


III. Wages and Currency

On the second day of the debate our friend Weston clothed his old
assertions in new forms. He said: Consequent upon a general rise in
money wages, more currency will be wanted to pay the same wages. The
currency being _fixed_, how can you pay with this fixed currency
increased money wages? First the difficulty arose from the fixed amount
of commodities accruing to the working man despite his increase of money
wages; now it arises from the increased money wages, despite the fixed
amount of commodities. Of course, if you reject his original dogma, his
secondary grievance will disappear. However, I shall show that this
currency question has nothing at all to do with the subject before us.

In your country the mechanism of payments is much more perfected than in
any other country of Europe. Thanks to the extent and concentration of
the banking system, much less currency is wanted to circulate the same
amount of values, and to transact the same or a greater amount of
business. For example, as far as wages are concerned, the English
factory operative pays his wages weekly to the shopkeeper, who sends
them weekly to the banker, who returns them weekly to the manufacturer,
who again pays them away to his working men, and so forth. By this
contrivance the yearly wages of an operative, say of 52 Pounds, may be
paid by one single Sovereign turning round every week in the same
circle. Even in England the mechanism is less perfect than in Scotland,
and is not everywhere equally perfect; and therefore we find, for
example, that in some agricultural districts, much more currency is
wanted to circulate a much smaller amount of values.

If you cross the Channel you will find that the _money wages_ are much
lower than in England, but that they are circulated in Germany, Italy,
Switzerland, and France by a _much larger amount of currency_. The same
Sovereign will not be so quickly intercepted by the banker or returned
to the industrial capitalist; and, therefore, instead of one Sovereign
circulating 52 Pounds yearly, you want, perhaps, three Sovereigns to
circulate yearly wages to the amount of 25 Pounds. Thus, by comparing
continental countries with England, you will see at once that low money
wages may require a much larger currency for their circulation than high
money wages, and that this is, in fact, a merely technical point, quite
foreign to our subject.

According to the best calculations I know, the yearly income of the
working class of this country may be estimated at 250,000,000 Pounds.
This immense sum is circulated by about three million Pounds. Suppose a
rise of wages of fifty per cent to take place. Then, instead of three
millions of currency, four and a half millions would be wanted. As a
very considerable part of the working-man's daily expenses is laid out
in silver and copper, that is to say, in mere tokens, whose relative
value to gold is arbitrarily fixed by law, like that of inconvertible
money paper, a rise of money wages by fifty per cent would, in the
extreme case, require and additional circulation of Sovereigns, say to
the amount of one million. One million, now dormant, in the shape of
bullion or coin, in the cellars of the Bank of England, or of private
bankers would circulate. But even the trifling expense resulting from
the additional minting or the additional wear and tear of that million
might be spared, and would actually be spared, if any friction should
arise from the want of the additional currency. All of you know that the
currency of this country is divided into two great departments. One
sort, supplied by bank-notes of different descriptions, is used in the
transactions between dealers and dealers, and the larger payments from
consumers to dealers, while another sort of currency, metallic coin,
circulates in the retail trade. Although distinct, these two sorts of
currency intermix with each other. Thus gold coin, to a very great
extent, circulates even in larger payments for all the odd sums under 5
Pounds. If tomorrow 4 Pound notes, or 3 Pound notes, or 2 Pound notes
were issued, the gold filling these channels of circulation would at
once be driven out of them, and flow into those channels where they
would be needed from the increase of money wages. Thus the additional
million required by an advance of wages by fifty per cent would be
supplied without the addition of one single Sovereign. The same effect
might be produced, without one additional bank-note, by an additional
bill circulation, as was the case in Lancashire for a very considerable
time.

If a general rise in the rate of wages, for example, of 100 per cent, as
Citizen Weston supposed it to take place in agricultural wages, would
produce a great rise in the prices of necessaries, and, according to his
views, require an additional amount of currency not to be procured, _a
general fall in wages_ must produce the same effect, on the same scale,
in the opposite direction. Well! All of you know that the years 1858 to
1860 were the most prosperous years for the cotton industry, and that
peculiarly the year 1860 stands in that respect unrivalled in the annals
of commerce, while at the same time all other branches of industry were
most flourishing. The wages of the cotton operatives and of all the
other working men connected with their trade stood, in 1860, higher than
ever before. The American crisis came, and those aggregate wages were
suddenly reduced to about one-fourth of their former amount. This would
have been in the opposite direction a rise of 400 per cent. If wages
rise from five to twenty, we say that they rise by 400 per cent; if they
fall from twenty to five, we say that they fall by seventy-five per
cent; but the amount of rise in the one and the amount of fall in the
other case would be the same, namely, fifteen shillings. This, then, was
a sudden change in the rate of wages unprecedented, and at the same time
extending over a number of operatives which, if we count all the
operatives not only directly engaged in but indirectly dependent upon
the cotton trade, was larger by one-half than the number of agricultural
labourers. Did the price of wheat fall? It _rose_ from the annual
average of 47 shillings 8d per quarter during the three years of
1858-1860 to the annual average of 55 shillings 10d per quarter during
the three years 1861-1863. As to the currency, there were coined in the
mint in 1861 8,673,323 Pounds, against 3,378,792 Pounds in 1860. That is
to say, there were coined 5,294,440 Pounds more in 1861 than in 1860. It
is true the bank-note circulation was in 1861 less by 1,319,000 Pounds
than in 1860. Take this off. There remains still a surplus of currency
for the year 1861, as compared with the prosperity year, 1860, to the
amount of 3,975,440 Pounds, or about 4,000,000 Pounds; but the bullion
reserve in the Bank of England had simultaneously decreased, not quite
to the same, but in an approximating proportion.

Compare the year 1862 with 1842. Apart from the immense increase in the
value and amount of commodities circulated, in 1862 the capital paid in
regular transactions for shares, loans, etc. for the railways in England
and Wales amounted alone to 320,000,000 Pounds, a sum that would have
appeared fabulous in 1842. Still, the aggregate amounts in currency in
1862 and 1842 were pretty nearly equal, and generally you will find a
tendency to a progressive diminution of currency in the face of
enormously increasing value, not only of commodities, but of monetary
transactions generally. From our friend Weston's standpoint this is an
unsolvable riddle. Looking somewhat deeper into this matter, he would
have found that, quite apart from wages, and supposing them to be fixed,
the value and mass of the commodities to be circulated, and generally
the amount of monetary transactions to be settled, vary daily; that the
amount of bank-notes issued varies daily; that the amount of payments
realized without the intervention of any money, by the instrumentality
of bills, cheques, book-credits, clearing houses, varies daily; that, as
far as actual metallic currency is required, the proportion between the
coin in circulation and the coin and bullion in reserve or sleeping in
the cellars of banks varies daily; that the amount of bullion absorbed
by the national circulation and the amount being sent abroad for
international circulation vary daily. He would have found that this
dogma of a fixed currency is a monstrous error, incompatible with our
everyday movement. He would have inquired into the laws which enable a
currency to adapt itself to circumstances so continually changing,
instead of turning his misconception of the laws of currency into an
argument against a rise of wages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


IV. Supply and Demand

Our friend Weston accepts the Latin proverb that “_repetitio est mater
studiorum_,” that is to say, that repetition is the mother of study, and
consequently he repeated his original dogma again under the new form,
that the contraction of currency, resulting from an enhancement of
wages, would produce a diminution of capital, and so forth. Having
already dealt with his currency crotchet, I consider it quite useless to
enter upon the imaginary consequences he fancies to flow from his
imaginary currency mishap. I shall proceed to at once reduce his _one
and the same dogma_, repeated in so many different shapes, to its
simplest theoretical form.

The uncritical way in which he has treated his subject will become
evident from one single remark. He pleads against a rise of wages or
against high wages as the result of such a rise. Now, I ask him: What
are high wages and what are low wages? Why constitute, for example, five
shillings weekly low, and twenty shillings weekly high wages? If five is
low as compared with twenty, twenty is still lower as compared with two
hundred. If a man was to lecture on the thermometer, and commenced by
declaiming on high and low degrees, he would impart no knowledge
whatever. He must first tell me how the freezing-point is found out, and
how the boiling-point, and how these standard points are settled by
natural laws, not by the fancy of the sellers or makers of thermometers.
Now, in regard to wages and profits, Citizen Weston has not only failed
to deduce such standard points from economical laws, but he has not even
felt the necessity to look after them. He satisfied himself with the
acceptance of the popular slang terms of low and high as something
having a fixed meaning, although it is self-evident that wages can only
be said to be high or low as compared with a standard by which to
measure their magnitudes.

He will be unable to tell me why a certain amount of money is given for
a certain amount of labour. If he should answer me, “This was settled by
the law of supply and demand,” I should ask him, in the first instance,
by what law supply and demand are themselves regulated. And such an
answer would at once put him out of court. The relations between the
supply and demand of labour undergo perpetual change, and with them the
market prices of labour. If the demand overshoots the supply wages rise;
if the supply overshoots the demand wages sink, although it might in
such circumstances be necessary to _test_ the real state of demand and
supply by a strike, for example, or any other method. But if you accept
supply and demand as the law regulating wages, it would be as childish
as useless to declaim against a rise of wages, because, according to the
supreme law you appeal to, a periodical rise of wages is quite as
necessary and legitimate as a periodical fall of wages. If you do _not_
accept supply and demand as the law regulating wages, I again repeat the
question, why a certain amount of money is given for a certain amount of
labour?

But to consider matters more broadly: You would be altogether mistaken
in fancying that the value of labour or any other commodity whatever is
ultimately fixed by supply and demand. Supply and demand regulate
nothing but the temporary _fluctuations_ of market prices. They will
explain to you why the market price of a commodity rises above or sinks
below its _value_, but they can never account for the _value_ itself.
Suppose supply and demand to equilibrate, or, as the economists call it,
to cover each other. Why, the very moment these opposite forces become
equal they paralyze each other, and cease to work in the one or other
direction. At the moment when supply and demand equilibrate each other,
and therefore cease to act, the _market price_ of a commodity coincides
with its _real value_, with the standard price round which its market
prices oscillate. In inquiring into the nature of that VALUE, we have
therefore nothing at all to do with the temporary effects on market
prices of supply and demand. The same holds true of wages and of the
prices of all other commodities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


V. Wages and Prices

Reduced to their simplest theoretical expression, all our friend's
arguments resolve themselves into this one dogma: “_The prices of
commodities are determined or regulated by wages._"

I might appeal to practical observation to bear witness against this
antiquated and exploded fallacy. I might tell you that the English
factory operatives, miners, shipbuilders, and so forth, whose labour is
relatively high-priced, undersell by the cheapness of their produce all
other nations; while the English agricultural labourer, for example,
whose labour is relatively low-priced, is undersold by almost every
other nation because of the dearness of his produce. By comparing
article with article in the same country, and the commodities of
different countries, I might show, apart from some exceptions more
apparent than real, that on an average the high-priced labour produces
the low-priced, and low priced labour produces the high-priced
commodities. This, of course, would not prove that the high price of
labour in the one, and its low price in the other instance, are the
respective causes of those diametrically opposed effects, but at all
events it would prove that the prices of commodities are not ruled by
the prices of labour. However, it is quite superfluous for us to employ
this empirical method.

It might, perhaps, be denied that Citizen Weston has put forward the
dogma: “_The prices of commodities are determined or regulated by
wages._” In point of fact, he has never formulated it. He said, on the
contrary, that profit and rent also form constituent parts of the prices
of commodities, because it is out of the prices of commodities that not
only the working man's wages, but also the capitalist's profits and the
landlord's rents must be paid. But how in his idea are prices formed?
First by wages. Then an additional percentage is joined to the price on
behalf of the capitalist, and another additional percentage on behalf of
the landlord. Suppose the wages of the labour employed in the production
of a commodity to be ten. If the rate of profit was 100 per cent, to the
wages advanced the capitalist would add ten, and if the rate of rent was
also 100 per cent upon the wages, there would be added ten more, and the
aggregate price of the commodity would amount to thirty. But such a
determination of prices would be simply their determination by wages. If
wages in the above case rose to twenty, the price of the commodity would
rise to sixty, and so forth. Consequently all the superannuated writers
on political economy who propounded the dogma that wages regulate
prices, have tried to prove it by treating profit and rent _as mere
additional percentages upon wages_. None of them were, of course, able
to reduce the limits of those percentages to any economic law. They
seem, on the contrary, to think profits settled by tradition, custom,
the will of the capitalist, or by some other equally arbitrary and
inexplicable method. If they assert that they are settled by the
competition between the capitalists, they say nothing. That competition
is sure to equalize the different rates of profit in different trades,
or reduce them to one average level, but it can never determine the
level itself, or the general rate of profit.

What do we mean by saying that the prices of the commodities are
determined by wages? Wages being but a name for the price of labour, we
mean that the prices of commodities are regulated by the price of
labour. As “price” is exchangeable value — and in speaking of value I
speak always of exchangeable value — is exchangeable _value expressed in
money_, the proposition comes to this, that “the _value of commodities_
is determined by the value of labour,” or that “the _value of labour is
the general measure of value_."

But how, then, is the “_value of labour_” itself determined? Here we
come to a standstill. Of course, we come to a standstill if we try
reasoning logically, yet the propounders of that doctrine make short
work of logical scruples. Take our friend Weston, for example. First he
told us that wages regulate the price of commodities and that
consequently when wages rise prices must rise. Then he turned round to
show us that a rise of wages will be no good because the prices of
commodities had risen, and because wages were indeed measured by the
prices of the commodities upon which they are spent. Thus we begin by
saying that the value of labour determines the value of commodities, and
we wind up by saying that the value of commodities determines the value
of labour. Thus we move to and fro in the most vicious circle, and
arrive at no conclusion at all.

On the whole, it is evident that by making the value of one commodity,
say labour, corn, or any other commodity, the general measure and
regulator of value, we only shift the difficulty, since we determine one
value by another, which on its side wants to be determined.

The dogma that “wages determine the price of commodities,” expressed in
its most abstract terms, comes to this, that “value is determined by
value,” and this tautology means that, in fact, we know nothing at all
about value. Accepting this premise, all reasoning about the general
laws of political economy turns into mere twaddle. It was, therefore,
the great merit of Ricardo that in his work on _the principles of
political economy_, published in 1817, he fundamentally destroyed the
old popular, and worn-out fallacy that “wages determine prices,” a
fallacy which Adam Smith and his French predecessors had spurned in the
really scientific parts of their researches, but which they reproduced
in their more exoterical and vulgarizing chapters.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. The Maximum Law was introduced during the Great French Revolution in
1792, fixing definite price limits for commodities and standard rates of
wages. The chief supporters of the Maximum Law were the so-called
“madmen” who represented the interests of the urban and village poor.
Robespierre, the leader of the Jacobin Party, introduced this law at a
time when the Jacobins as a result of tactical considerations had formed
a bloc with the “madmen.” – _Ed._

2. Robert Owen (1771-1858) was a British manufacturer who became a
utopian socialist. He introduced in his factory the ten-hour day, and
also organised sickness insurance, consumers' co-operative societies,
etc. – _Ed._

3. These figures, 55s.-70s., refer to the total wages of the group of
five men. The wage of each man in the group would increase from 11s. to
14s. – _Ed._

------------------------------------------------------------------------


VI. Value and Labour

Citizens, I have now arrived at a point where I must enter upon the real
development of the question. I cannot promise to do this in a very
satisfactory way, because to do so I should be obliged to go over the
whole field of political economy. I can, as the French would say, but
“effleurer la question,” touch upon the main points. The first question
we have to put is: What is the _value_ of a commodity? How is it
determined?

At first sight it would seem that the value of a commodity is a thing
quite _relative_, and not to be settled without considering one
commodity in its relations to all other commodities. In fact, in
speaking of the value, the value in exchange of a commodity, we mean the
proportional quantities in which it exchanges with all other
commodities. But then arises the question: How are the proportions in
which commodities exchange with each other regulated? We know from
experience that these proportions vary infinitely. Taking one single
commodity, wheat, for instance, we shall find that a quarter of wheat
exchanges in almost countless variations of proportion with different
commodities. Yet, _its value remaining_ _always the same_, whether
expressed in silk, gold, or any other commodity, it must be something
distinct from, and independent of, these _different rates of exchange_
with different articles. It must be possible to express, in a very
different form, these various equations with various commodities.

Besides, if I say a quarter of wheat exchanges with iron in a certain
proportion, or the value of a quarter of wheat is expressed in a certain
amount of iron, I say that the value of wheat and its equivalent in iron
are equal to _some third thing_, which is neither wheat nor iron,
because I suppose them to express the same magnitude in two different
shapes. Either of them, the wheat or the iron, must, therefore,
independently of the other, be reducible to this third thing which is
their common measure.

To elucidate this point I shall recur to a very simple geometrical
illustration. In comparing the areas of triangles of all possible forms
and magnitudes, or comparing triangles with rectangles, or any other
rectilinear figure, how do we proceed? We reduce the area of any
triangle whatever to an expression quite different from its visible
form. Having found from the nature of the triangle that its area is
equal to half the product of its base by its height, we can then compare
the different values of all sorts of triangles, and of all rectilinear
figures whatever, because all of them may be resolved into a certain
number of triangles.

The same mode of procedure must obtain with the values of commodities.
We must be able to reduce all of them to an expression common to all,
and distinguishing them only by the proportions in which they contain
that identical measure.

As the _exchangeable values_ of commodities are only _social functions_
of those things, and have nothing at all to do with the _natural_
qualities, we must first ask: What is the common _social substance_ of
all commodities? It is _labour_. To produce a commodity a certain amount
of labour must be bestowed upon it, or worked up in it. And I say not
only _labour_, but _social labour_. A man who produces an article for
his own immediate use, to consume it himself, creates a _product_, but
not a _commodity_. As a self-sustaining producer he has nothing to do
with society. But to produce a _commodity_, a man must not only produce
an article satisfying some _social_ want, but his labour itself must
form part and parcel of the total sum of labour expended by society. It
must be subordinate to the _division of labour within society_. It is
nothing without the other divisions of labour, and on its part is
required to _integrate_ them.

If we consider _commodities as values_, we consider them exclusively
under the single aspect of _realized, fixed_, or, if you like,
_crystallized social labour_. In this respect they can _differ_ only by
representing greater or smaller quantities of labour, as, for example, a
greater amount of labour may be worked up in a silken handkerchief than
in a brick. But how does one measure _quantities of labour_? By the
_time the labour lasts_, in measuring the labour by the hour, the day,
etc. Of course, to apply this measure, all sorts of labour are reduced
to average or simple labour as their unit. We arrive, therefore, at this
conclusion. A commodity has _a value_, because it is a _crystallization
of social labour_. The _greatness_ of its value, or its _relative_
value, depends upon the greater or less amount of that social substance
contained in it; that is to say, on the relative mass of labour
necessary for its production. The _relative values of commodities_ are,
therefore, determined by the _respective quantities or amounts of
labour, worked up, realized, fixed in them_. The _correlative_
quantities of commodities which can be produced in the _same time of
labour_ are _equal_. Or the value of one commodity is to the value of
another commodity as the quantity of labour fixed in the one is to the
quantity of labour fixed in the other.

I suspect that many of you will ask: Does then, indeed, there exist such
a vast or any difference whatever, between determining the values of
commodities by _wages_, and determining them by the _relative quantities
of labour_ necessary for their production? You must, however, be aware
that the _reward_ for labour, and _quantity_ of labour, are quite
disparate things. Suppose, for example, _equal quantities of labour_ to
be fixed in one quarter of wheat and one ounce of gold. I resort to the
example because it was used by Benjamin Franklin in his first Essay
published in 1721, and entitled _A Modest Enquiry into the Nature and
Necessity of a Paper Currency_, where he, one of the first, hit upon the
true nature of value.

Well. We suppose, then, that one quarter of wheat and one ounce of gold
are _equal values_ or _equivalents_, because they are _crystallizations
of equal amounts of average labour_, of so many days' or so many weeks'
labour respectively fixed in them. In thus determining the relative
values of gold and corn, do we refer in any way whatever to the _wages_
of the agricultural labourer and the miner? Not a bit. We leave it quite
_indeterminate_ how their day's or their week's labour was paid, or even
whether wage labour was employed at all. If it was, wages may have been
very unequal. The labourer whose labour is realized in the quarter of
wheat may receive two bushels only, and the labourer employed in mining
may receive one-half of the ounce of gold. Or, supposing their wages to
be equal, they may deviate in all possible proportions from the values
of the commodities produced by them. They may amount to one-fourth,
one-fifth, or any other proportional part of the one quarter of corn or
the one ounce of gold. Their _wages_ can, of course, not _exceed_, not
be _more_ than the values of the commodities they produced, but they can
be _less_ in every possible degree. Their _wages_ will be _limited_ by
the _values_ of the products, but the _values of their products_ will
not be limited by the wages. And above all, the values, the relative
values of corn and gold, for example, will have been settled without any
regard whatever to the value of the labour employed, that is to say, to
_wages_. To determine the values of commodities by the _relative
quantities of labour fixed in them_, is, therefore, a thing quite
different from the tautological method of determining the values of
commodities by the value of labour, or by _wages_. This point, however,
will be further elucidated in the progress of our inquiry.

In calculating the exchangeable value of a commodity we must add to the
quantity of labour _previously_ worked up in the raw material of the
commodity, and the labour bestowed on the implements, tools, machinery,
and buildings, with which such labour is assisted. For example, the
value of a certain amount of cotton yarn is the crystallization of the
quantity of labour added to the cotton during the spinning process, the
quantity of labour previously realized in the cotton itself, the
quantity of labour realized in the coal, oil, and other auxiliary
substances used, the quantity of labour fixed in the steam-engine, the
spindles, the factory building, and so forth. Instruments of production
properly so-called, such as tools, machinery, buildings, serve again and
again for longer or shorter period during repeated processes of
production. If they were used up at once, like the raw material, their
whole value would at once be transferred to the commodities they assist
in producing. But as a spindle, for example, is but gradually used up,
an average calculation is made, based upon the average time it lasts,
and its average waste or wear and tear during a certain period, say a
day. In this way we calculate how much of the value of the spindle is
transferred to the yarn daily spin, and how much, therefore, of the
total amount of labour realized in a pound of yarn, for example, is due
to the quantity of labour previously realized in the spindle. For our
present purpose it is not necessary to dwell any longer upon this point.

It might seem that if the value of a commodity is determined by the
_quantity of labour bestowed upon its production_, the lazier a man, or
the clumsier a man, the more valuable his commodity, because the greater
the time of labour required for finishing the commodity. This, however,
would be a sad mistake. You will recollect that I used the word
“_social_ labour,” and many points are involved in this qualification of
“_social_.” In saying that the value of a commodity is determined by the
_quantity of labour_ worked up or crystallized in it, we mean _the
quantity of labour necessary_ for its production in a given state of
society, under certain social average conditions of production, with a
given social average intensity, and average skill of the labour
employed. When, in England, the power-loom came to compete with the
hand-loom, only half the former time of labour was wanted to convert a
given amount of yarn into a yard of cotton or cloth. The poor hand-loom
weaver now worked seventeen or eighteen hours daily, instead of the nine
or ten hours he had worked before. Still the product of twenty hours of
his labour represented now only ten social hours of labour, or ten hours
of labour socially necessary for the conversion of a certain amount of
yarn into textile stuffs. His product of twenty hours had, therefore, no
more value than his former product of ten hours.

If then the quantity of socially necessary labour realized in
commodities regulates their exchangeable values, every increase in the
quantity of labour wanted for the production of a commodity must augment
its value, as every diminution must lower it.

If the respective quantities of labour necessary for the production of
the respective commodities remained constant, their relative values also
would be constant. But such is not the case. The quantity of labour
necessary for the production of a commodity changes continuously with
the changes in the productive powers of labour, the more produce is
finished in a given time of labour; and the smaller the productive
powers of labour, the less produce is finished in the same time. If, for
example, in the progress of population it should become necessary to
cultivate less fertile soils, the same amount of produce would be only
attainable by a greater amount of labour spent, and the value of
agricultural produce would consequently rise. On the other hand, if,
with the modern means of production, a single spinner converts into
yarn, during one working day, many thousand times the amount of cotton
which he could have spun during the same time with the spinning wheel,
it is evident that every single pound of cotton will absorb many
thousand times less of spinning labour than it did before, and
consequently, the value added by spinning to every single pound of
cotton will be a thousand times less than before. The value of yarn will
sink accordingly.

Apart from the different natural energies and acquired working abilities
of different peoples, the productive powers of labour must principally
depend: —

Firstly. Upon the _natural_ conditions of labour, such as fertility of
soil, mines, and so forth.

Secondly. Upon the progressive improvement of the _social powers of
labour_, such as are derived from production on a grand scale,
concentration of capital and combination of labour, subdivision of
labour, machinery, improved methods, appliance of chemical and other
natural agencies, shortening of time and space by means of communication
and transport, and every other contrivance by which science presses
natural agencies into the service of labour, and by which the social or
co-operative character of labour is developed. The greater the
productive powers of labour, the less labour is bestowed upon a given
amount of produce; hence the smaller the value of the produce. The
smaller the productive powers of labour, the more labour is bestowed
upon the same amount of produce; hence the greater its value. As a
general law we may, therefore, set it down that: —

_The values of commodities are directly as the times of labour employed
in their production, and are inversely as the productive powers of the
labour employed._

Having till now only spoken of _value_, I shall add a few words about
_price_, which is a peculiar form assumed by value.

Price, taken by itself, is nothing but the _monetary expression of
value_. The values of all commodities of the country, for example, are
expressed in gold prices, while on the Continent they are mainly
expressed in silver prices. The value of gold or silver, like that of
all other commodities is regulated by the quantity of labour necessary
for getting them. You exchange a certain amount of your national
products, in which a certain amount of your national labour is
crystallized, for the produce of the gold and silver producing
countries, in which a certain quantity of _their_ labour is
crystallized. It is in this way, in fact by barter, that you learn to
express in gold and silver the values of all commodities, that is the
respective quantities of labour bestowed upon them. Looking somewhat
closer into the _monetary expression of value_, or what comes to the
same, the conversion of value into price, you will find that it is a
process by which you give to the _values_ of all commodities an
_independent_ and _homogeneous form_, or by which you express them as
quantities of equal social labour. So far as it is but the monetary
expression of value, price has been called _natural price_ by Adam
Smith, “_prix necessaire_” by the French physiocrats.

What then is the relation between _value_ and _market prices_, or
between _natural prices_ and _market prices_? You all know that the
_market price_ is the _same_ for all commodities of the same kind,
however the conditions of production may differ for the individual
producers. The market price expresses only the _average amount of social
labour_ necessary, under the average conditions of production, to supply
the market with a certain mass of a certain article. It is calculated
upon the whole lot of a commodity of a certain description.

So far the _market price_ of a commodity coincides with its _value_. On
the other hand, the oscillations of market prices, rising now over,
sinking now under the value or natural price, depend upon the
fluctuations of supply and demand. The deviations of market prices from
values are continual, but as Adam Smith says:

“The natural price is the central price to which the prices of
commodities are continually gravitating. Different accidents may
sometimes keep them suspended a good deal above it, and sometimes force
them down even somewhat below it. But whatever may be the obstacles
which hinder them from settling in this center of repose and
continuance, they are constantly tending towards it.”

I cannot now sift this matter. It suffices to say the _if_ supply and
demand equilibrate each other, the market prices of commodities will
correspond with their natural prices, that is to say with their values,
as determined by the respective quantities of labour required for their
production. But supply and demand _must_ constantly tend to equilibrate
each other, although they do so only by compensating one fluctuation by
another, a rise by a fall, and _vice versa_. If instead of considering
only the daily fluctuations you analyze the movement of market prices
for longer periods, as Mr. Tooke, for example, has done in his _History
of Prices_, you will find that the fluctuations of market prices, their
deviations from values, their ups and downs, paralyze and compensate
each other; so that apart from the effect of monopolies and some other
modifications I must now pass by, all descriptions of commodities are,
on average, sold at their respective _values_ or natural prices. The
average periods during which the fluctuations of market prices
compensate each other are different for different kinds of commodities,
because with one kind it is easier to adapt supply to demand than with
the other.

If then, speaking broadly, and embracing somewhat longer periods, all
descriptions of commodities sell at their respective values, it is
nonsense to suppose that profit, not in individual cases; but that the
constant and usual profits of different trades spring from the prices of
commodities, or selling them at a price over and above their _value_.
The absurdity of this notion becomes evident if it is generalized. What
a man would constantly win as a seller he would constantly lose as a
purchaser. It would not do to say that there are men who are buyers
without being sellers, or consumers without being producers. What these
people pay to the producers, they must first get from them for nothing.
If a man first takes your money and afterwards returns that money in
buying your commodities, you will never enrich yourselves by selling
your commodities too dear to that same man. This sort of transaction
might diminish a loss, but would never help in realizing a profit. To
explain, therefore, the _general nature of profits_, you must start from
the theorem that, on an average, commodities are _sold at their real
values_, and that _profits are derived from selling them at their
values_, that is, in proportion to the quantity of labour realized in
them. If you cannot explain profit upon this supposition, you cannot
explain it at all. This seems paradox and contrary to every-day
observation. It is also paradox that the earth moves round the sun, and
that water consists of two highly inflammable gases. Scientific truth is
always paradox, if judged by every-day experience, which catches only
the delusive appearance of things.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


VII. Labour Power

Having now, as far as it could be done in such a cursory manner,
analyzed the nature of _value_, of the _value of any commodity
whatever_, we must turn our attention to the specific _value of labour_.
And here, again, I must startle you by a seeming paradox. All of you
feel sure that what they daily sell is their Labour; that, therefore,
Labour has a price, and that, the price of a commodity being only the
monetary expression of its value, there must certainly exist such a
thing as the _value of labour_. However, there exists no such thing as
the _value of labour_ in the common acceptance of the word. We have seen
that the amount of necessary labour crystallized in a commodity
constitutes its value. Now, applying this notion of value, how could we
define, say, the value of a ten hours working day? How much labour is
contained in that day? Ten hours' labour.

To say that the value of a ten hours working day is equal to ten hours'
labour, or the quantity of labour contained in it, would be a
tautological and, moreover, a nonsensical expression. Of course, having
once found out the true but hidden sense of the expression “_value of
labour_,” we shall be able to interpret this irrational, and seemingly
impossible application of value, in the same way that, having once made
sure of the real movement of the celestial bodies, we shall be able to
explain their apparent or merely phenomenal movements.

What the working man sells is not directly his _labour_, but his
_labouring power_, the temporary disposal of which he makes over to the
capitalist. This is so much the case that I do not know whether by the
English Laws, but certainly by some Continental Laws, the _maximum time_
is fixed for which a man is allowed to sell his labouring power. If
allowed to do so for any indefinite period whatever, slavery would be
immediately restored. Such a sale, if it comprised his lifetime, for
example, would make him at once the lifelong slave of his employer.

One of the oldest economists and most original philosophers of England —
Thomas Hobbes — has already, in his Leviathan, instinctively hit upon
this point overlooked by all his successors. He says: “_the value or
worth of a man_ is, as in all other things, his _price_: that is so much
as would be given for the _use of his power_.” Proceeding from this
basis, we shall be able to determine the _value of labour_ as that of
all other commodities.

But before doing so, we might ask, how does this strange phenomenon
arise, that we find on the market a set of buyers, possessed of land,
machinery, raw material, and the means of subsistence, all of them, save
land in its crude state, the _products of labour_, and on the other
hand, a set of sellers who have nothing to sell except their labouring
power, their working arms and brains? That the one set buys continually
in order to make a profit and enrich themselves, while the other set
continually sells in order to earn their livelihood? The inquiry into
this question would be an inquiry into what the economists call
“_previous or original accumulation_,” but which ought to be called
_original expropriation_. We should find that this so-called _original
accumulation_ means nothing but a series of historical processes,
resulting in a _decomposition_ of the _original union_ existing between
the labouring Man and his Instruments of Labour. Such an inquiry,
however, lies beyond the pale of my present subject. The _separation_
between the Man of Labour and the Instruments of Labour once
established, such a state of things will maintain itself and reproduce
itself upon a constantly increasing scale, until a new and fundamental
revolution in the mode of production should again overturn it, and
restore the original union in a new historical form.

What, then, is the _value of labouring power_?

Like that of every other commodity, its value is determined by the
quantity of labour necessary to produce it. The labouring power of a man
exists only in his living individuality. A certain mass of necessaries
must be consumed by a man to grow up and maintain his life. But the man,
like the machine, will wear out, and must be replaced by another man.
Beside the mass of necessaries required for _his own_ maintenance, he
wants another amount of necessaries to bring up a certain quota of
children that are to replace him on the labour market and to perpetuate
the race of labourers. Moreover, to develop his labouring power, and
acquire a given skill,another amount of values must be spent. For our
purpose it suffices to consider only _average_ labour, the costs of
whose education and development are vanishing magnitudes. Still I must
seize upon this occasion to state that, as the costs of producing
labouring powers of different quality differ, so much differ the values
of the labouring powers employed in different trades. The cry for an
_equality of wages_ rests, therefore, upon a mistake, is an inane wish
never to be fulfilled. It is an offspring of that false and superficial
radicalism that accepts premises and tries to evade conclusions. Upon
the basis of the wages system the value of labouring power is settled
like that of every other commodity; and as different kinds of labouring
power have different values, or require different quantities of labour
for their production, they _must_ fetch different prices in the labour
market. To clamour for _equal or even equitable_ _retribution_ on the
basis of the wages system is the same as to clamour for _freedom_ on the
basis of the slavery system. What you think just or equitable is out of
the question. The question is: What is necessary and unavoidable with a
given system of production? After what has been said, it will be seen
that the _value of labouring power_ is determined by the _value of the
necessaries_ required to produce, develop, maintain, and perpetuate the
labouring power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


VIII. Production of Surplus Value

Now suppose that the average amount of the daily necessaries of a
labouring man require _six hours of average labour_ for their
production. Suppose, moreover, six hours of average labour to be also
realized in a quantity of gold equal to 3s. Then 3s. would be the
_price_, or the monetary expression of the _daily value_ of that man's
_labouring power_. If he worked daily six hours he would daily produce a
value sufficient to buy the average amount of his daily necessaries, or
to maintain himself as a labouring man.

But our man is a wages labourer. He must, therefore, sell his labouring
power to a capitalist. If he sells it at 3s. daily, or 18s. weekly, he
sells it at its value. Suppose him to be a spinner. If he works six
hours daily he will add to the cotton a value of 3s. daily. This value,
daily added by him, would be an exact equivalent for the wages, or the
price of his labouring power, received daily. But in that case _no
surplus value_ or _surplus produce_ whatever would go to the capitalist.
Here, then, we come to the rub.

In buying the labouring power of the workman, and paying its value, the
capitalist, like every other purchaser, has acquired the right to
consume or use the commodity bought. You consume or use the labouring
power of a man by making him work, as you consume or use a machine by
making it run. By buying the daily or weekly value of the labouring
power of the workman, the capitalist has, therefore, acquired the right
to use or make that labouring power during the _whole day or week_. The
working day or the working week has, of course, certain limits, but
those we shall afterwards look more closely at.

For the present I want to turn your attention to one decisive point. The
_value_ of the labouring power is determined by the quantity of labour
necessary to maintain or reproduce it, but the _use_ of that labouring
power is only limited by the active energies and physical strength of
the labourer. The daily or weekly _value_ of the labouring power is
quite distinct from the daily or weekly exercise of that power, the same
as the food a horse wants and the time it can carry the horseman are
quite distinct. The quantity of labour by which the _value_ of the
workman's labouring power is limited forms by no means a limit to the
quantity of labour which his labouring power is apt to perform. Take the
example of our spinner. We have seen that, to daily reproduce his
labouring power, he must daily reproduce a value of three shillings,
which he will do by working six hours daily. But this does not disable
him from working ten or twelve or more hours a day. But by paying the
daily or weekly _value_ of the spinner's labouring power the capitalist
has acquired the right of using that labouring power during _the whole
day or week_. He will, therefore, make him work say, daily_, twelve
hours. Over and above_ the six hours required to replace his wages, or
the value of his labouring power, he will, therefore, have to work _six
other hours_, which I shall call hours of _surplus labour_, which
surplus labour will realize itself in a _surplus value_ and a _surplus
produce_. If our spinner, for example, by his daily labour of six hours,
added three shillings' value to the cotton, a value forming an exact
equivalent to his wages, he will, in twelve hours, add six shillings'
worth to the cotton, and produce _a proportional surplus of yarn_. As he
has sold his labouring power to the capitalist, the whole value of
produce created by him belongs to the capitalist, the owner _pro tem_.
of his labouring power. By advancing three shillings, the capitalist
will, therefore, realize a value of six shillings, because, advancing a
value in which six hours of labour are crystallized, he will receive in
return a value in which twelve hours of labour are crystallized. By
repeating this same process daily, the capitalist will daily advance
three shillings and daily pocket six shillings, one half of which will
go to pay wages anew, and the other half of which will form _surplus
value_, for which the capitalist pays no equivalent. It is this _sort of
exchange between capital and labour_ upon which capitalistic production,
or the wages system, is founded, and which must constantly result in
reproducing the working man as a working man, and the capitalist as a
capitalist.

_The rate of surplus value_, all other circumstances remaining the same,
will depend on the proportion between that part of the working day
necessary to reproduce the value of the labouring power and the _surplus
time_ or _surplus labour_ performed for the capitalist. It will,
therefore, depend on the _ratio in which the working day is prolonged
over and above that extent_, by working which the working man would only
reproduce the value of his labouring power, or replace his wages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


IX. Value of Labour

We must now return to the expression, “_value, or price of labour_.” We
have seen that, in fact, it is only the value of the labouring power,
measured by the values of commodities necessary for its maintenance. But
since the workman receives his wages _after_ his labour is performed,
and knows, moreover, that what he actually gives to the capitalist is
his labour, the value or price of his labouring power necessarily
appears to him as the _price_ or _value of his labour itself_. If the
price of his labouring power is three shillings, in which six hours of
labour are realized, and if he works twelve hours, he necessarily
considers these three shillings as the value or price of twelve hours of
labour, although these twelve hours of labour realize themselves in a
value of six shillings. A double consequence flows from this.

Firstly. The _value or price of the labouring power_ takes the semblance
of the _price or value of labour itself_, although, strictly speaking,
value and price of labour are senseless terms.

Secondly. Although one part only of the workman's daily labour is
_paid_, while the other part is _unpaid_, and while that unpaid or
surplus labour constitutes exactly the fund out of which _surplus value_
or _profit_ is formed, it seems as if the aggregate labour was paid
labour.

This false appearance distinguishes _wages labour_ from other
_historical_ forms of labour. On the basis of the wages system even the
_unpaid_ labour seems to be _paid_ labour. With the _slave_, on the
contrary, even that part of his labour which is paid appears to be
unpaid. Of course, in order to work the slave must live, and one part of
his working day goes to replace the value of his own maintenance. But
since no bargain is struck between him and his master, and no acts of
selling and buying are going on between the two parties, all his labour
seems to be given away for nothing.

Take, on the other hand, the peasant serf, such as he, I might say,
until yesterday existed in the whole of East of Europe. This peasant
worked, for example, three days for himself on his own field or the
field allotted to him, and the three subsequent days he performed
compulsory and gratuitous labour on the estate of his lord. Here, then,
the paid and unpaid parts of labour were sensibly separated, separated
in time and space; and our Liberals overflowed with moral indignation at
the preposterous notion of making a man work for nothing.

In point of fact, however, whether a man works three days of the week
for himself on his own field and three days for nothing on the estate of
his lord, or whether he works in the factory or the workshop six hours
daily for himself and six for his employer, comes to the same, although
in the latter case the paid and unpaid portions of labour are
inseparably mixed up with each other, and the nature of the whole
transaction is completely masked by the _intervention of a contract_ and
the _pay_ received at the end of the week. The gratuitous labour appears
to be voluntarily given in the one instance, and to be compulsory in the
other. That makes all the difference.

In using the word “_value of labour_,” I shall only use it as a popular
slang term for “_value of labouring power_."

------------------------------------------------------------------------


X. Profit is Made by Selling a Commodity at its Value

Suppose an average hour of labour to be realized in a value equal to
sixpence, or twelve average hours of labour to be realized in six
shillings. Suppose, further, the value of labour to be three shillings
or the produce of six hours' labour. If, then, in the raw material,
machinery, and so forth, used up in a commodity, twenty-four hours of
average labour were realized, its value would amount to twelve
shillings. If, moreover, the workman employed by the capitalist added
twelve hours of labour to those means of production, these twelve hours
would be realized in an additional value of six shillings. The _total
value of the product_ would, therefore, amount to thirty-six hours of
realized labour, and be equal to eighteen shillings. But as the value of
labour, or the wages paid to the workman, would be three shillings only,
no equivalent would have been paid by the capitalist for the six hours
of surplus labour worked by the workman, and realized in the value of
the commodity. By selling this commodity at its value for eighteen
shillings, the capitalist would, therefore, realize a value of three
shillings, for which had paid no equivalent. These three shillings would
constitute the surplus value or profit pocketed by him. The capitalist
would consequently realize the profit of three shillings, not by selling
his commodity at a price _over and above_ its value, but by selling it
_at its real value_.

The value of a commodity is determined by the _total quantity of labour_
contained in it. But part of that quantity of labour is realized in a
value for which and equivalent has been paid in the form of wages; part
of it is realized in a value for which NO equivalent has been paid. Part
of the labour contained in the commodity is _paid_ labour; part is
_unpaid_ labour. By selling, therefore, the commodity _at its value_,
that is, as the crystallization of the _total quantity of labour_
bestowed upon it, the capitalist must necessarily sell it at a profit.
He sells not only what has cost him an equivalent, but he sells also
what has cost him nothing, although it has cost his workman labour. The
cost of the commodity to the capitalist and its real cost are different
things.

I repeat, therefore, that normal and average profits are made by selling
commodities not _above_, but _at their real values_.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


XI. The Different Parts into which Surplus Value is Decomposed

The _surplus value_, or that part of the total value of the commodity in
which the _surplus labour_ or _unpaid labour_ of the working man is
realized, I call _profit_. The whole of that profit is not pocketed by
the employing capitalist. The monopoly of land enables the landlord to
take one part of that _surplus value_, under the name of _rent_, whether
the land is used for agricultural buildings or railways, or for any
other productive purpose. On the other hand, the very fact that the
possession of the _instruments of labour_ enables the employing
capitalist to produce a _surplus value_, or, what comes to the same, to
_appropriate to himself a certain amount of unpaid labour_, enables the
owner of the means of labour, which he lends wholly or partly to the
employing capitalist — enables, in one word, the money-lending
capitalist to claim for himself under the name of _interest_ another
part of that surplus value, so that there remains to the employing
capitalist _as such_ only what is called _industrial_ or _commercial
profit_.

By what laws this division of the total amount of surplus value amongst
the three categories of people is regulated is a question quite foreign
to our subject. This much, however, results from what has been stated.

_Rent, interest, and industrial profit_ are only different names for
different parts of the _surplus value_ of the commodity, or the _unpaid
labour enclosed in it_, and they are _equally derived from this source
and from this source alone_. They are not derived from _land_ as such or
from _capital_ as such, but land and capital enable their owners to get
their respective shares out of the surplus value extracted by the
employing capitalist from the labourer. For the labourer himself it is a
matter of subordinate importance whether that surplus value, the result
of his surplus labour, or unpaid labour, is altogether pocketed by the
employing capitalist, or whether the latter is obliged to pay portions
of it, under the name of rent and interest, away to third parties.
Suppose the employing capitalist to use only his own capital and to be
his own landlord, then the whole surplus value would go into his pocket.

It is the employing capitalist who immediately extracts from the
labourer this surplus value, whatever part of it he may ultimately be
able to keep for himself. Upon this relation, therefore between the
employing capitalist and the wages labourer the whole wages system and
the whole present system of production hinge. Some of the citizens who
took part in our debate were, there, wrong in trying to mince matters,
and to treat this fundamental relation between the employing capitalist
and the working man as a secondary question, although they were right in
stating that, under given circumstances, a rise of prices might affect
in very unequal degrees the employing capitalist, the landlord, the
moneyed capitalist, and, if you please, the tax-gatherer.

Another consequence follows from what has been stated.

That part of the value of the commodity which represents only the value
of the raw materials, the machinery, in one word, the value of the means
of production used up, forms _no revenue_ at all, but replaces _only
capital_. But, apart from this, it is false that the other part of the
value of the commodity _which forms revenue_, or may be spent in the
form of wages, profits, rent, interest, is _constituted_ by the value of
wages, the value of rent, the value of profits, and so forth. We shall,
in the first instance, discard wages, and only treat industrial profits,
interest, and rent. We have just seen that the _surplus value_ contained
in the _commodity_, or that part of its value in which _unpaid labour_
is realized, resolves itself into different fractions, bearing three
different names.

But it would be quite the reverse of the truth to say that its value is
_composed_ of, or _formed_ by, the _addition_ of the _independent values
of these three constituents_.

If one hour of labour realizes itself in a value of sixpence, if the
working day of the labourer comprises twelve hours, if half of this time
is unpaid labour, that surplus labour will add to the commodity a
_surplus value_ of three shillings, that is of value for which no
equivalent has been paid. This surplus value of three shillings
constitutes the _whole fund_ which the employing capitalist may divide,
in whatever proportions, with the landlord and the money-lender. The
value of these three shillings constitutes the limit of the value they
have to divide amongst them. But it is not the employing capitalist who
adds to the value of the commodity an arbitrary value for his profit, to
which another value is added for the landlord, and so forth, so that the
addition of these arbitrarily fixed values would constitute the total
value. You see, therefore, the fallacy of the popular notion, which
confounds the _decomposition of a given value_ into three parts, with
the _formation_ of that value by the addition of three _independent_
values, thus converting the aggregate value, from which rent, profit,
and interest are derived, into an arbitrary magnitude.

If the total profit realized by a capitalist is equal to 100 Pounds, we
call this sum, considered as _absolute_ magnitude, the _amount of
profit_. But if we calculate the ratio which those 100 Pounds bear to
the capital advanced, we call this _relative_ magnitude, the _rate of
profit_. It is evident that this rate of profit may be expressed in a
double way.

Suppose 100 Pounds to be the capital _advanced in wages_. If the surplus
value created is also 100 Pounds — and this would show us that half the
working day of the labourer consists of _unpaid_ labour — and if we
measured this profit by the value of the capital advanced in wages, we
should say that the _rate of profit_ amounted to one hundred percent,
because the value advanced would be one hundred and the value realized
would be two hundred.

If, on the other hand, we should not only consider the _capital advanced
in wages_, but the _total capital_ advanced, say, for example, 500
Pounds, of which 400 Pounds represented the value of raw materials,
machinery, and so forth, we should say that the _rate of profit_
amounted only to twenty percent, because the profit of one hundred would
be but the fifth part of the _total_ capital advanced.

The first mode of expressing the rate of profit is the only one which
shows you the real ratio between paid and unpaid labour, the real degree
of the _exploitation_ (you must allow me this French word) _of labour_.
The other mode of expression is that in common use, and is, indeed,
appropriate for certain purposes. At all events, it is very useful for
concealing the degree in which the capitalist extracts gratuitous labour
from the workman.

In the remarks I have still to make I shall use the word _profit_ for
the whole amount of the surplus value extracted by the capitalist
without any regard to the division of that surplus value between
different parties, and in using the words _rate of profit_, I shall
always measure profits by the value of the capital advanced in wages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


XII. General Relation of Profits, Wages, and Prices

Deduct from the value of a commodity the value replacing the value of
the raw materials and other means of production used upon it, that is to
say, deduct the value representing the _past_ labour contained in it,
and the remainder of its value will resolve into the quantity of labour
added by the working man _last_ employed. If that working man works
twelve hours daily, if twelve hours of average labour crystallize
themselves in an amount of gold equal to six shillings, this additional
value of six shillings is the _only_ value his labour will have created.
This given value, determined by the time of his labour, is the only fund
from which both he and the capitalist have to draw their respective
shares or dividends, the only value to be divided into wages and
profits. It is evident that this value itself will not be altered by the
variable proportions in which it may be divided amongst the two parties.
There will also be nothing changed if in the place of one working man
you put the whole working population, twelve million working days, for
example, instead of one.

Since the capitalist and workman have only to divide this limited value,
that is, the value measured by the total labour of the working man, the
more the one gets the less will the other get, and _vice versa_.
Whenever a quantity is given, one part of it will increase inversely as
the other decreases. If the wages change, profits will change in an
opposite direction. If wages fall, profits will rise; and if wages rise,
profits will fall. If the working man, on our former supposition, gets
three shillings, equal to one half of the value he has created, or if
his whole working day consists half of paid, half of unpaid labour, the
_rate of profit_ will be 100 percent, because the capitalist would also
get three shillings. If the working man receives only two shillings, or
works only one third of the whole day for himself, the capitalist will
get four shillings, and the rate of profit will be 200 per cent. If the
working man receives four shillings, the capitalist will only receive
two, and the rate of profit would sink to 50 percent, but all these
variations will not affect the value of the commodity. A general rise of
wages would, therefore, result in a fall of the general rate of profit,
but not affect values.

But although the values of commodities, which must ultimately regulate
their market prices, are exclusively determined by the total quantities
of labour fixed in them, and not by the division of that quantity into
paid and unpaid labour, it by no means follows that the values of the
single commodities, or lots of commodities, produced during twelve
hours, for example, will remain constant. The _number_ or mass of
commodities produced in a given time of labour, or by a given quantity
of labour, depends upon the _productive power_ of the labour employed,
and not upon its _extent_ or length. With one degree of the productive
power of spinning labour, for example, a working day of twelve hours may
produce twelve pounds of yarn, with a lesser degree of productive power
only two pounds. If then twelve hours' average labour were realized in
the value of six shillings in the one case, the twelve pounds of yarn
would cost six shillings, in the other case the two pounds of yarn would
also cost six shillings. One pound of yarn would, therefore, cost
sixpence in the one case, and three shillings in the other. The
difference of price would result from the difference in the productive
powers of labour employed. One hour of labour would be realized in one
pound of yarn with the greater productive power, while with the smaller
productive power, six hours of labour would be realized in one pound of
yarn. The price of a pound of yarn would, in the one instance, be only
sixpence, although wages were relatively high and the rate of profit
low; it would be three shillings in the other instance, although wages
were low and the rate of profit high. This would be so because the price
of the pound of yarn is regulated by the _total amount of labour worked
up in it_, and not by the _proportional division of that total amount
into paid and unpaid labour_. The fact I have mentioned before that
high-price labour may produce cheap, and low-priced labour may produce
dear commodities, loses, therefore, its paradoxical appearance. It is
only the expression of the general law that the value of a commodity is
regulated by the quantity of labour worked up in it, and the the
quantity of labour worked up in it depends altogether upon the
productive powers of labour employed, and will therefore, vary with
every variation in the productivity of labour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


XIII. Main Cases of Attempts at Raising Wages or Resisting their Fall

Let us now seriously consider the main cases in which a rise of wages is
attempted or a reduction of wages resisted.

1. We have seen that the _value of the labouring power_, or in more
popular parlance, the _value of labour_, is determined by the value of
necessaries, or the quantity of labour required to produce them.

If, then, in a given country the value of the daily average necessaries
of the labourer represented six hours of labour expressed in three
shillings, the labourer would have to work six hours daily to produce an
equivalent for this daily maintenance. If the whole working day was
twelve hours, the capitalist would pay him the value of his labour by
paying him three shillings. Half the working day would be unpaid labour,
and the rate of profit would amount to 100 percent. But now suppose
that, consequent upon a decrease of productivity, more labour should be
wanted to produce, say, the same amount of agricultural produce, so that
the price of the average daily necessaries should rise from three to
four shillings. In that case the _value_ of labour would rise by one
third, or 33 1/3 percent. Eight hours of the working day would be
required to produce an equivalent for the daily maintenance of the
labourer, according to his old standard of living. The surplus labour
would therefore sink from six hours to four, and the rate of profit from
100 to 50 percent. But in insisting upon a rise of wages, the labourer
would only insist upon getting the _increased value of his labour_, like
every other seller of a commodity, who, the costs of his commodities
having increased, tries to get its increased value paid. If wages did
not rise, or not sufficiently rise, to compensate for the increased
values of necessaries, the _price_ of labour would sink below the _value
of labour_, and the labourer's standard of life would deteriorate.

But a change might also take place in an opposite direction. By virtue
of the increased productivity of labour, the same amount of the average
daily necessaries might sink from three to two shillings, or only four
hours out of the working day, instead of six, be wanted to reproduce an
equivalent for the value of the daily necessaries. The working man would
now be able to buy with two shillings as many necessaries as he did
before with three shillings. Indeed, the _value of labour_ would have
sunk, but diminished value would command the same amount of commodities
as before. Then profits would rise from three to four shillings, and the
rate of profit from 100 to 200 percent. Although the labourer's absolute
standard of life would have remained the same, his _relative_ wages, and
therewith his relative social position, as compared with that of the
capitalist, would have been lowered. If the working man should resist
that reduction of relative wages, he would only try to get some share in
the increased productive powers of his own labour, and to maintain his
former relative position in the social scale. Thus, after the abolition
of the Corn Laws, and in flagrant violation of the most solemn pledges
given during the anti-corn law agitation, the English factory lords
generally reduced wages ten per cent. The resistance of the workmen was
at first baffled, but, consequent upon circumstances I cannot now enter
upon, the ten per cent lost were afterwards regained.

2. The _values_ of necessaries, and consequently the _value of labour_,
might remain the same, but a change might occur in their _money prices_,
consequent upon a previous change in the _value of money_. By the
discovery of more fertile mines and so forth, two ounces of gold might,
for example, cost no more labour to produce than one ounce did before.
The _value_ of gold would then be depreciated by one half, or fifty per
cent. As the _values_ of all other commodities would then be expressed
in twice their former _money prices_, so also the same with the _value
of labour_. Twelve hours of labour, formerly expressed in six shillings,
would now be expressed in twelve shillings. If the working man's wages
should remain three shillings, instead of rising to six shillings, the
_money price of his labour_ would only be equal to _half the value of
his labour_, and his standard of life would fearfully deteriorate. This
would also happen in a greater or lesser degree if his wages should
rise, but not proportionately to the fall in the value of gold. In such
a case nothing would have been changed, either in the productive powers
of labour, or in supply and demand, or in values.

Nothing would have changed except the money _names_ of those values. To
say that in such a case the workman ought not to insist upon a
proportionate rise of wages, is to say that he must be content to be
paid with names, instead of with things. All past history proves that
whenever such a depreciation of money occurs, the capitalists are on the
alert to seize this opportunity for defrauding the workman. A very large
school of political economists assert that, consequent upon the new
discoveries of gold lands, the better working of silver mines, and the
cheaper supply of quicksilver, the value of precious metals has again
depreciated. This would explain the general and simultaneous attempts on
the Continent at a rise of wages.

3. We have till now supposed that the _working day_ has given limits.
The working day, however, has, by itself, no constant limits. It is the
constant tendency of capital to stretch it to its utmost physically
possible length, because in the same degree surplus labour, and
consequently the profit resulting therefrom, will be increased. The more
capital succeeds in prolonging the working day, the greater the amount
of other peoples' labour it will appropriate.

During the seventeenth and even the first two thirds of the eighteenth
century a ten hours' working day was the normal working day all over
England. During the anti-Jacobin war, which was in fact a war waged by
the British barons against the British working masses, capital
celebrated its bacchanalia, and prolonged the working day from ten to
twelve, fourteen, eighteen hours. Malthus, by no means a man whom you
would suspect of a maudlin sentimentalism declared in a pamphlet,
published about 1815, that if this sort of thing was to go on the life
of the nation would be attacked at its very source. A few years before
the general introduction of newly-invented machinery, about 1765, a
pamphlet appeared in England under the title, _An Essay On Trade_. The
anonymous author, an avowed enemy of the working classes, declaims on
the necessity of expanding the limits of the working day. Amongst other
means to this end, he proposes _working houses_, which, he says, ought
to be “Houses of Terror.” And what is the length of the working he
prescribes for these “Houses of Terror"? _Twelve hours_, the very same
time which in 1832 was declared by capitalists, political economists,
and ministers to be not only the existing but the necessary time of
labour for a child under twelve years.

By selling his labouring power, and he must do so under the present
system, the working man makes over to the capitalist the consumption of
that power, but within certain rational limits. He sells his labouring
power in order to maintain it, apart from its natural wear and tear, but
not to destroy it. In selling his labouring power at its daily or weekly
value, it is understood that in one day or one week that labouring power
shall not be submitted to two days' or two weeks' waste or wear and
tear. Take a machine worth 1000 Pounds. If it is used up in ten years it
will add to the value of the commodities in whose production it assists
100 Pounds yearly. If it is used up in five years it will add 200 Pounds
yearly, or the value of its annual wear and tear is in inverse ratio to
the quickness with which it is consumed. But this distinguishes the
working man from the machine. Machinery does not wear out exactly in the
same ratio in which it is used. Man, on the contrary, decays in a
greater ratio than would be visible from the mere numerical addition of
work.

In their attempts at reducing the working day to its former rational
dimensions, or, where they cannot enforce a legal fixation of a normal
working day, at checking overwork by a rise of wages, a rise not only in
proportion to the surplus time exacted, but in a greater proportion,
working men fulfill only a duty to themselves and their race. They only
set limits to the tyrannical usurpations of capital. Time is the room of
human development. A man who has no free time to dispose of, whose whole
lifetime, apart from the mere physical interruptions by sleep, meals,
and so forth, is absorbed by his labour for the capitalist, is less than
a beast of burden. He is a mere machine for producing Foreign Wealth,
broken in body and brutalized in mind. Yet the whole history of modern
industry shows that capital, if not checked, will recklessly and
ruthlessly work to cast down the whole working class to this utmost
state of degradation.

In prolonging the working day the capitalist may pay _higher wages_ and
still lower the _value of labor_, if the rise of wages does not
correspond to the greater amount of labour extracted, and the quicker
decay of the labouring power thus caused. This may be done in another
way. Your middle-class statisticians will tell you, for instance, that
the average wages of factory families in Lancashire has risen. They
forget that instead of the labour of the man, the head of the family,
his wife and perhaps three or four children are now thrown under the
Juggernaut wheels of capital, and that the rise of the aggregate wages
does not correspond to the aggregate surplus labour extracted from the
family.

Even with given limits of the working day, such as they now exist in all
branches of industry subjected to the factory laws, a rise of wages may
become necessary, if only to keep up the old standard _value of labour_.
By increasing the _intensity_ of labour, a man may be made to expend as
much vital force in one hour as he formerly did in two. This has, to a
certain degree, been effected in the trades, placed under the Factory
Acts, by the acceleration of machinery, and the greater number of
working machines which a single individual has now to superintend. If
the increase in the intensity of labour or the mass of labour spent in
an hour keeps some fair proportion to the decrease in the extent of the
working day, the working man will still be the winner. If this limit is
overshot, he loses in one form what he has gained in another, and ten
hours of labour may then become as ruinous as twelve hours were before.
In checking this tendency of capital, by struggling for a rise of wages
corresponding to the rising intensity of labour, the working man only
resists the depreciation of his labour and the deterioration of his
race.

4. All of you know that, from reasons I have not now to explain,
capitalistic production moves through certain periodical cycles. It
moves through a state of quiescence, growing animation, prosperity,
overtrade, crisis, and stagnation. The market prices of commodities, and
the market rates of profit, follow these phases, now sinking below their
averages, now rising above them.

Considering the whole cycle, you will find that one deviation of the
market price is being compensated by the other, and that, taking the
average of the cycle, the market prices of commodities are regulated by
their values. Well! During the phases of sinking market prices and the
phases of crisis and stagnation, the working man, if not thrown out of
employment altogether, is sure to have his wages lowered. Not to be
defrauded, he must, even with such a fall of market prices, debate with
the capitalist in what proportional degree a fall of wages has become
necessary. If, during the phases of prosperity, when extra profits are
made, he did not battle for a rise of wages, he would, taking the
average of one industrial cycle, not even receive his _average wages_,
or the _value_ of his labour. It is the utmost height of folly to
demand, that while his wages are necessarily affected by the adverse
phases of the cycle, he should exclude himself from compensation during
the prosperous phases of the cycle. Generally, the _values_ of all
commodities are only realized by the compensation of the continuously
changing market prices, springing from the continuous fluctuations of
demand and supply. On the basis of the present system labour is only a
commodity like others. It must, therefore, pass through the same
fluctuations to fetch an average price corresponding to its value.

It would be absurd to treat it on the one hand as a commodity, and to
want on the other hand to exempt it from the laws which regulate the
prices of commodities. The slave receives a permanent and fixed amount
of maintenance; the wage-labourer does not. He must try to get a rise of
wages in the one instance, if only to compensate for a fall of wages in
the other. If he resigned himself to accept the will, the dictates of
the capitalist as a permanent economical law, he would share in all the
miseries of the slave, without the security of the slave.

5. In all the cases I have considered, and they form ninety-nine out of
a hundred, you have seen that a struggle for a rise of wages follows
only in the track of _previous_ changes, and is the necessary offspring
of previous changes in the amount of production, the productive powers
of labour, the value of labour, the value of money, the extent or the
intensity of labour extracted, the fluctuations of market prices,
dependent upon the fluctuations of demand and supply, and consistent
with the different phases of the industrial cycle; in one word, as
reactions of labour against the previous action of capital. By treating
the struggle for a rise of wages independently of all these
circumstances, by looking only upon the change of wages, and overlooking
all other changes from which they emanate, you proceed from a false
premise in order to arrive at false conclusions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------


XIV. The Struggle Between Capital and Labour and its Results

1. Having shown that the periodical resistance on the part of the
working men against a reduction of wages, and their periodical attempts
at getting a rise of wages, are inseparable from the wages system, and
dictated by the very fact of labour being assimilated to commodities,
and therefore subject to the laws, regulating the general movement of
prices; having furthermore, shown that a general rise of wages would
result in a fall in the general rate of profit, but not affect the
average prices of commodities, or their values, the question now
ultimately arises, how far, in this incessant struggle between capital
and labour, the latter is likely to prove successful.

I might answer by a generalization, and say that, as with all other
commodities, so with labour, its _market price_ will, in the long run,
adapt itself to its _value_; that, therefore, despite all the ups and
downs, and do what he may, the working man will, on an average, only
receive the value of his labour, which resolves into the value of his
labouring power, which is determined by the value of the necessaries
required for its maintenance and reproduction, which value of
necessaries finally is regulated by the quantity of labour wanted to
produce them.

But there are some peculiar features which distinguish the _value of the
labouring power, or the value of labour_, from the values of all other
commodities. The value of the labouring power is formed by two elements
-- the one merely physical, the other historical or social. Its
_ultimate limit_ is determined by the _physical_ element, that is to
say, to maintain and reproduce itself, to perpetuate its physical
existence, the working class must receive the necessaries absolutely
indispensable for living and multiplying. The _value_ of those
indispensable necessaries forms, therefore, the ultimate limit of the
_value of labour_. On the other hand, the length of the working day is
also limited by ultimate, although very elastic boundaries. Its ultimate
limit is given by the physical force of the labouring man. If the daily
exhaustion of his vital forces exceeds a certain degree, it cannot be
exerted anew, day by day.

However, as I said, this limit is very elastic. A quick succession of
unhealthy and short-lived generations will keep the labour market as
well supplied as a series of vigorous and long-lived generations.
Besides this mere physical element, the value of labour is in every
country determined by a _traditional standard of life_. It is not mere
physical life, but it is the satisfaction of certain wants springing
from the social conditions in which people are placed and reared up. The
English standard of life may be reduced to the Irish standard; the
standard of life of a German peasant to that of a Livonian peasant. The
important part which historical tradition and social habitude play in
this respect, you may learn from Mr. Thornton's work on
_over-population_, where he shows that the average wages in different
agricultural districts of England still nowadays differ more or less
according to the more or less favourable circumstances under which the
districts have emerged from the state of serfdom.

This historical or social element, entering into the value of labour,
may be expanded, or contracted, or altogether extinguished, so that
nothing remains but the _physical limit_. During the time of the
anti-Jacobin war, undertaken, as the incorrigible tax-eater and
sinecurist, old George Rose, used to say, to save the comforts of our
holy religion from the inroads of the French infidels, the honest
English farmers, so tenderly handled in a former chapter of ours,
depressed the wages of the agricultural labourers even beneath that
_mere physical minimum_, but made up by Poor Laws the remainder
necessary for the physical perpetuation of the race. This was a glorious
way to convert the wages labourer into a slave, and Shakespeare's proud
yeoman into a pauper.

By comparing the standard wages or values of labour in different
countries, and by comparing them in different historical epochs of the
same country, you will find that the _value of labour_ itself is not a
fixed but a variable magnitude, even supposing the values of all other
commodities to remain constant.

A similar comparison would prove that not only the _market rates_ of
profit change, but its _average_ rates.

But as to _profits_, there exists no law which determines their
_minimum_. We cannot say what is the ultimate limit of their decrease.
And why cannot we fix that limit? Because, although we can fix the
_minimum_ of wages, we cannot fix their _maximum_.

We can only say that, the limits of the working day being given, the
_maximum of profit_ corresponds to the _physical minimum of wages_; and
that wages being given, the _maximum of profit_ corresponds to such a
prolongation of the working day as is compatible with the physical
forces of the labourer. The maximum of profit is therefore limited by
the physical minimum of wages and the physical maximum of the working
day. It is evident that between the two limits of the _maximum rate of
profit_ and immense scale of variations is possible. The fixation of its
actual degree is only settled by the continuous struggle between capital
and labour, the capitalist constantly tending to reduce wages to their
physical minimum, and to extend the working day to its physical maximum,
while the working man constantly presses in the opposite direction.

The matter resolves itself into a question of the respective powers of
the combatants.

2. As to the _limitation of the working day_ in England, as in all other
countries, it has never been settled except by _legislative
interference_. Without the working men's continuous pressure from
without that interference would never have taken place. But at all
events, the result was not to be attained by private settlement between
the working men and the capitalists. This very necessity of _general
political action_ affords the proof that in its merely economical action
capital is the stronger side.

As to the _limits_ of the _value of labour_, its actual settlement
always depends upon supply and demand, I mean the demand for labour on
the part of capital, and the supply of labour by the working men. In
colonial countries the law of supply and demand favours the working man.
Hence the relatively high standard of wages in the United States.
Capital may there try its utmost. It cannot prevent the labour market
from being continuously emptied by the continuous conversion of wages
labourers into independent, self-sustaining peasants. The position of a
wages labourer is for a very large part of the American people but a
probational state, which they are sure to leave within a longer or
shorter term. To mend this colonial state of things the paternal British
Government accepted for some time what is called the modern colonization
theory, which consists in putting an artificial high price upon colonial
land, in order to prevent the too quick conversion of the wages labourer
into the independent peasant.

But let us now come to old civilized countries, in which capital
domineers over the whole process of production. Take, for example, the
rise in England of agricultural wages from 1849 to 1859. What was its
consequence? The farmers could not, as our friend Weston would have
advised them, raise the value of wheat, nor even its market prices. They
had, on the contrary, to submit to their fall. But during these eleven
years they introduced machinery of all sorts, adopted more scientific
methods, converted part of arable land into pasture, increased the size
of farms, and with this the scale of production, and by these and other
processes diminishing the demand for labour by increasing its productive
power, made the agricultural population again relatively redundant. This
is the general method in which a reaction, quicker or slower, of capital
against a rise of wages takes place in old, settled countries. Ricardo
has justly remarked that machinery is in constant competition with
labour, and can often be only introduced when the price of labour has
reached a certain height, but the appliance of machinery is but one of
the many methods for increasing the productive powers of labour. The
very same development which makes common labour relatively redundant
simplifies, on the other hand, skilled labour, and thus depreciates it.

The same law obtains in another form. With the development of the
productive powers of labour the accumulation of capital will be
accelerated, even despite a relatively high rate of wages. Hence, one
might infer, as Adam Smith, in whose days modern industry was still in
its infancy, did infer, that the accelerated accumulation of capital
must turn the balance in favour of the working man, by securing a
growing demand for his labour. From this same standpoint many
contemporary writers have wondered that English capital having grown in
that last twenty years so much quicker than English population, wages
should not have been more enhanced. But simultaneously with the progress
of accumulation there takes place a _progressive change in the
composition of capital_. That part of the aggregate capital which
consists of fixed capital, machinery, raw materials, means of production
in all possible forms, progressively increases as compared with the
other part of capital, which is laid out in wages or in the purchase of
labour. This law has been stated in a more or less accurate manner by
Mr. Barton, Ricardo, Sismondi, Professor Richard Jones, Professor
Ramsey, Cherbuilliez, and others.

If the proportion of these two elements of capital was originally one to
one, it will, in the progress of industry, become five to one, and so
forth. If of a total capital of 600, 300 is laid out in instruments, raw
materials, and so forth, and 300 in wages, the total capital wants only
to be doubled to create a demand for 600 working men instead of for 300.
But if of a capital of 600, 500 is laid out in machinery, materials, and
so forth and 100 only in wages, the same capital must increase from 600
to 3,600 in order to create a demand for 600 workmen instead of 300. In
the progress of industry the demand for labour keeps, therefore, no pace
with the accumulation of capital. It will still increase, but increase
in a constantly diminishing ratio as compared with the increase of
capital.

These few hints will suffice to show that the very development of modern
industry must progressively turn the scale in favour of the capitalist
against the working man, and that consequently the general tendency of
capitalistic production is not to raise, but to sink the average
standard of wages, or to push the _value of labour_ more or less to its
_minimum limit_. Such being the tendency of _things_ in this system, is
this saying that the working class ought to renounce their resistance
against the encroachments of capital, and abandon their attempts at
making the best of the occasional chances for their temporary
improvement? If they did, they would be degraded to one level mass of
broken wretches past salvation. I think I have shown that their
struggles for the standard of wages are incidents inseparable from the
whole wages system, that in 99 cases out of 100 their efforts at raising
wages are only efforts at maintaining the given value of labour, and
that the necessity of debating their price with the capitalist is
inherent to their condition of having to sell themselves as commodities.
By cowardly giving way in their everyday conflict with capital, they
would certainly disqualify themselves for the initiating of any larger
movement.

At the same time, and quite apart from the general servitude involved in
the wages system, the working class ought not to exaggerate to
themselves the ultimate working of these everyday struggles. They ought
not to forget that they are fighting with effects, but not with the
causes of those effects; that they are retarding the downward movement,
but not changing its direction; that they are applying palliatives, not
curing the malady. They ought, therefore, not to be exclusively absorbed
in these unavoidable guerilla fights incessantly springing up from the
never ceasing encroachments of capital or changes of the market. They
ought to understand that, with all the miseries it imposes upon them,
the present system simultaneously engenders the _material conditions_
and the _social forms_ necessary for an economical reconstruction of
society. Instead of the _conservative_ motto: “_A fair day's wage for a
fair day's work!_” they ought to inscribe on their banner the
_revolutionary_ watchword: “_Abolition of the wages system!_"

After this very long and, I fear, tedious exposition, which I was
obliged to enter into to do some justice to the subject matter, I shall
conclude by proposing the following resolutions:

_Firstly._ A general rise in the rate of wages would result in a fall of
the general rate of profit, but, broadly speaking, not affect the prices
of commodities.

_Secondly._ The general tendency of capitalist production is not to
raise, but to sink the average standard of wages.

_Thirdly._ Trades Unions work well as centers of resistance against the
encroachments of capital. They fail partially from an injudicious use of
their power. They fail generally from limiting themselves to a guerilla
war against the effects of the existing system, instead of
simultaneously trying to change it, instead of using their organized
forces as a lever for the final emancipation of the working class that
is to say the ultimate abolition of the wages system.

International Workingmen’s Association 1865



NOTES FOR THE REPORT ON VALUE, PRICE AND PROFIT


------------------------------------------------------------------------

Source: _MECW_, Volume 20, p. 338;
Written: by Karl Marx in June 1865;
First published: in Russian, in _Generalny Sovet Pervogo
Internatsionala. 1864-1866_, 1961.

 

These notes were made by Marx in his Notebook for the report he
delivered in the Central Council on June 20 and 27, 1865. They are a
version of the last part of the report, the basic conclusions of which
were formulated as resolutions proposed to the Council. On the final
text of the concluding part of the report.

This document was published in English for the first time in _The
General Council of the First_ International. 1864-1866, Moscow, 1962.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1) A general rise in the rate of wages will, broadly speaking, produce a
general fall in the rate of profits, leaving the values of commodities
unaltered.

2) Under very exceptional circumstances, only a general rise of wages
could be realised. If obtained, it could only [be] lost under very
exceptional circumstances. The general tendency of production, upon its
present basis, is not to raise, but to lower wages. Even if a general
rise in the rate of wages should obtain for any longer period, it would
not abolish but only mitigate the slavery of the wages’ labourer, that
is, of the mass of the people.

3) Trades’ Unions work well as far as they counteract, if even
temporarily, the tendency to a fall in the general rate of wages, and as
far as they tend to shorten and regulate the time of labour, in other
words, the extent of the working day. They work well as far as they are
a means of organising the working class as a class. They fail
accidentally, by an injudicious use of their power, and they fail
generally by accepting the present relations of capital and labour as
permanent instead of working for their abolition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------
